Observation of Floquet-Bloch states on the surface of a topological insulator 
Y. H. Wang†, H. Steinberg, P. Jarillo-Herrero & N. Gedik* 
Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA 02139.  
* To whom correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed. Email: gedik@mit.edu 
† Present address: Department of Physics and Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305  
 
The unique electronic properties of the surface electrons in a topological insulator are 
protected by time-reversal symmetry. Circularly polarized light naturally breaks time-
reversal symmetry, which may lead to an exotic surface quantum Hall state. Using time- 
and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, we show that an intense ultrashort mid-
infrared pulse with energy below the bulk band gap hybridizes with the surface Dirac 
fermions of a topological insulator to form Floquet-Bloch bands. These photon dressed 
surface bands exhibit polarization-dependent band gaps at avoided crossings. Circularly 
polarized photons induce an additional gap at the Dirac point, which is a signature of 
broken time-reversal symmetry on the surface. These observations establish the Floquet-
Bloch bands in solids and pave the way for optical manipulation of topological quantum 
states of matter. 
  
2 
 
Three dimensional topological insulators (TIs) host an exotic surface state that obeys the Dirac 
equation and exhibit spin momentum locking. The gapless surface states are protected by time-
reversal symmetry (TRS), the breaking of which is predicted to lead to many exotic states (1-3). 
Doping TIs with magnetic impurities breaks TRS on the surface (4-7), but it also introduces 
disorder (8); the coherent interaction between light and matter is a promising alternative route 
towards such a broken symmetry phase (9-12). This coherent effect is seen in atoms and 
molecules as hybridized states distinctive in their energy spectra (13, 14) and in photonic 
systems as Floquet states (15). In solid state systems the photon-dressed bands lead to a 
periodic band structure in both energy and momentum called Floquet-Bloch states (16). In the 
case of TIs, an additional effect is expected to take place when circularly polarized light is 
coupled with the surface states: TRS will be spontaneously broken and the surface Dirac cone 
becomes gapped (9, 17).  
 
Floquet theorem states that a Hamiltonian periodic in time has quasi-static eigenstates that are 
evenly spaced by the drive photon energy (18). These so-called Floquet states can be regarded 
as a time analog of Bloch states, which are the eigenstates of a Hamiltonian periodic in space 
(19). Combining the two situations, a periodic excitation on a crystalline lattice induces Floquet-
Bloch bands that repeat in both momentum and energy. Just as different Bloch bands hybridize 
and develop band gaps at the crossing points (19), the crossing points between different orders 
(𝑛) of the Floquet-Bloch bands open dynamic gaps (16, 20). Although conventional optical 
spectroscopy (21-23) and photoemission spectroscopy  (24, 25) have shown many coherent 
phenomena under intense radiation, a technique that can probe the states in an energy-
momentum resolved manner while applying a strong photoexcitation is needed to image the 
Floquet-Bloch states and the photo-induced band gaps on the surface of a TI. 
 
Time- and- angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (TrARPES) is a powerful technique 
capable of resolving such photo-induced band gaps (26-28). When the photon energy of the 
laser that excites the sample is below the bulk band gap (typically less than 300 meV), the 
coherent interaction between light and the TI surface states are the dominant effect (10, 11). 
3 
To achieve this regime, we used polarized photons at mid- infrared (MIR) wavelengths to 
investigate the photon-dressed surface states in TIs.  
 
We use a time-of-flight spectrometer to simultaneously acquire the complete surface band 
structure of Bi2Se3 without changing the sample or the detector orientation in a pump-probe 
scheme (28, 29). The MIR pump pulses are generated from a commercial optical parametric 
amplifier pumped by a Titanium:Sapphire amplifier. The output pulses are tunable in 
wavelength from 4 µm to 17 µm with 1 µJ peak energy. The MIR pulses are focused to a 300 
µm diameter spot (FWHM) on the single crystal Bi2Se3 sample at an angle of 45 degrees. The 
pulsewidth is estimated to be 250 fs (FWHM) from the rising edge of the momentum integrated 
time spectrum [Fig. S1D]. We estimate the amplitude of the electric field to be 𝐸0 = 2.5(±1) ×
107 V/m on the surface of the sample after taking into account the loss through the optics, the 
geometric effect and the Fresnel reflection (30) at the vacuum-sample interface (31). The 
polarization of the MIR pulse is adjusted by a quarter wave-plate. Figure 1A illustrates the p-
polarized case in which the electric field of light is in the plane of incidence. The component of 
the surface electron momentum in the plane of incidence is defined as 𝑘𝑥. 
 
Figure 1, B-F shows energy-momentum spectra of Bi2Se3 obtained at several time delays 𝑡 after 
the intense linearly polarized MIR excitation. At 𝑡 = −500 fs, the probe UV pulse is ahead of 
the MIR pulse and the band structure is similar to that of an unperturbed system [Fig. 1B] (28). 
The asymmetry in the spectral intensity about zero momentum Γ is due to the coupling 
between the linearly polarized UV pulse and the spin-orbit texture of the surface states of TI 
(29). When the two pulses start to overlap in time (𝑡 =  −200 fs), replicas of the surface Dirac 
cone appear above and below the original band [Fig. 1C]. The energy difference between the 
bands equals exactly the pump photon energy of ℏ𝜔 = 120 meV, where ℏ is the reduced 
Planck constant and 𝜔 is the angular frequency of light. The intensity of such side bands 
becomes stronger while the original band gets weaker when the pump and probe pulses are 
completely overlapped at 𝑡 =  0 [Fig. 1D]. When the side bands become weaker again at 200 fs 
[Fig. 1E], the spectral intensity still above the Fermi level occupies the higher energy states of 
4 
the original surface and bulk bands rather than the sidebands. This suggests the onset of a 
thermally excited carrier population as has been observed previously with 1.5 eV 
photoexcitations (26, 28). This excited population is still present at 500 fs [Fig. 1F], consistent 
with the observed photoexcited carrier cooling time in this material (26, 28). The fact that the 
sidebands are only present during the time duration of the pump pulse suggests that it is a 
consequence of the coherent interaction between the MIR photons and the electron system. In 
a TrARPES experiment, strong IR field may also generate band replicas through laser assisted 
photoemission (LAPE) (24, 25). Because this effect is caused by the absorption of MIR photons 
by the near-free electrons in the final states of photoemission, the LAPE bands do not open 
band gaps at where they cross and their intensity is at a minimum in the direction 
perpendicular to the light polarization, which is inconsistent with our findings (31). 
 
To see how the photon-dressed bands change with respect to the polarization of light and 
whether there are band gaps, we compare the energy momentum spectra taken at 𝑡 = 0 fs 
along the directions parallel and perpendicular to the electric field of the linearly polarized 
pump [Fig. 2]. Compared with the sidebands along 𝑘𝑥 [Fig. 2A], the sidebands in the 𝑘𝑦 
direction shows a higher order (𝑛 = +2) more clearly [Fig. 2B]. More importantly the bands are 
much stronger and show features which deviate from a mere stacking of Dirac cones at 
energies close to the 𝑛 = 0 Dirac point (0.15eV < 𝐸 < 0.3eV). The otherwise linearly 
dispersing 𝑛 = 0 cone becomes discontinuous and distorted at 𝐸 = 0.1eV and 0.22eV [Fig. 2B, 
pink triangles]. 
 
In order to better visualize these features, we subtract the spectrum taken at 𝑡 = −500 fs from 
the spectrum at 𝑡 = 0 fs, which includes the spectral contribution from the unperturbed 
surface bands due to the finite pulse width (31). The difference spectrum along 𝑘𝑦 [Fig. 2D] 
shows a pattern resembling an ‘∞’ sign centered at the 𝑛 = 0 Dirac point. There is a replica of 
this ∞ pattern at one pump photon energy (120 meV) above the one around 𝑛 = 0 Dirac point, 
suggesting that this is a coherent feature on the photo-induced bands. 𝐸 = 0.1eV is the middle 
point of these two ∞, suggesting that the kinks in the raw spectrum [Fig. 2B] correspond to 
5 
opening of band gaps. These features are in contrast to the difference spectrum in the 𝑘𝑥 
direction, where the pattern is simply composed of three Dirac cones shifted by ℏ𝜔 [Fig. 2C]. 
This momentum-dependent feature is consistent with the prediction of photon-dressed Dirac 
bands in graphene under linearly polarized light (32-34), where Floquet-Bloch bands open band 
gaps along the direction perpendicular to the electric field whereas the bands with momentum 
parallel to the field remain gapless. 
 
For an ideal Dirac cone [Fig. 2E], the avoided crossing between adjacent orders are centered at 
momenta ±𝜔/2𝑣, where 𝑣 is the Fermi velocity of the surface states. In our case, we can see in 
the difference spectra the crossing of bands at 𝑘𝑥~ ± 0.03 Å−1 [Fig. 2C] while the band gaps 
appear at similar values of 𝑘𝑦 [Fig. 2D]. This is slightly bigger than the expected value of 
𝜔/2𝑣 = 0.02 Å−1 (using ℏ𝜔 = 120 meV and ℏ𝑣 = 3 eVÅ [Fig. 1A]), likely resulting from the 
reduced velocity of bands below the Dirac point [Fig. 1]. At 𝑘𝑦 =  ±0.06 Å−1 where 𝑛 =  ±1 
cross, there is no resolvable gap [Fig. 2D]. Therefore, the “∞” pattern around the 𝑛 = 0 Dirac 
point is a result of the crossings and avoided crossings between 𝑛 = 0 and 𝑛 = ±1 [Figs. 2, D 
and E]. The energy distribution curve [Fig. S1A] through the avoided crossing shows a 2∆ value 
of 62 meV. Along with the crossings and avoided crossings between different orders, the gap 
size is consistent with the theory of photon-dressed Dirac systems based on the Floquet picture 
(31-34).  
 
Having shown that linearly polarized MIR photons couple with the surface states into Floquet-
Bloch bands, we investigate how these bands change when the photons become circularly 
polarized. Unlike the bands under linearly polarized light, the spectrum under circularly-
polarized light show avoided crossing around ±0.03 Å−1 along both 𝑘𝑥 and 𝑘𝑦 [Figs. 3, A-D]. 
Spectral cuts along other in-plane directions through Γ [Fig. S3C] further show that the 
dynamical gap does not close for any direction. This is consistent with the Floquet-Bloch bands 
generated by the coupling between circularly polarized in-plane electric field and the surface 
states [Fig. 3E].  
 
6 
Knowing that the surface electrons and the rotating electric field of the circularly polarized MIR 
pulse are coupled, we examine the Dirac point of the induced Floquet-Bloch bands for 
signatures of TRS breaking [Fig. 3F]. The spectral weight above and below the Dirac point 
increases at 𝑡 = 0 for both polarizations [Figs. 2, C and D and 3, C and D]. To be able to resolve 
any gap around the Dirac point, we convert the intensity spectra for both polarizations [Figs. 2B 
and 3B] into energy distribution curves (EDC) by integrating the spectra over a small 
momentum window (0.005Å−1) at each momentum point along 𝑘𝑦 [Fig. 4]. The EDCs show that 
only the spectrum obtained under circularly polarized excitations opens a band gap at the Dirac 
point [Fig. 4A], whereas such a gap is absent in the curves taken under linearly polarized light 
[Fig. 4B]. The EDC through the Γ point under circularly polarized light clearly show two peaks at the 
Dirac point [Fig. 4C blue]. (The small hump in the EDC under linearly polarized excitation [Fig. 4C red] is 
a result of the finite momentum resolution of our spectrometer (~0.005Å−1) and is also visible in the 
EDC of unperturbed spectrum [Fig. 4C black].) This result is similarly observed in the difference 
spectrum between the two polarizations as negative spectral weight at the Dirac point [Fig. 
S4A]. By fitting the energy distribution curve through the Γ point in Figure 4A, we obtain the 
band gap 2𝜅 = 53 𝑚𝑒𝑉 [Fig. S1B]. Using the 2∆ value we obtained from the dynamic gap (31), 
we find that the Dirac gap is consistent with the gap resulting from the two-photon process 
(absorbing and emitting a photon) that is only allowed under circular polarization that breaks 
TRS (9, 34).  
 
The surface Dirac Hamiltonian hybridized with circularly polarized light essentially result in a 
Chern insulator as originally proposed by Haldane (35). In his model, alternating current loops 
break TRS locally while the total magnetization remains zero. Whereas such microscopic 
periodic current configuration is difficult to implement, the Hamiltonian of graphene per valley 
in the Haldane model is basically the same as that of a circularly polarized electromagnetic field 
coupled to a Dirac band (9), which is realized in our experiment. These observations suggest the 
existence of a photoinduced anomalous quantum Hall phase without Landau levels where 
topological magnetoelectric effect described by axion electrodynamics may exist (5). 
 
7 
The quantitative agreement between the measured gap sizes and the models based on Floquet 
theory shows the general applicability of our result to Dirac systems. These observations open 
up an avenue for optical controlling and switching topological orders and may provide a 
platform for realizing Floquet Majorana modes in these materials (1,2).  
8 
References and Notes 
 
(1)  M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, "Topological insulators," Rev. Mod. Phys.  82, 3045, (2010).  
(2) X. L. Qi and S. C. Zhang, "Topological insulators and superconductors," Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 1057 
(2011)   
(3)  J. E. Moore, "The birth of topological insulators," Nature, 464, 194, (2010).  
(4)  C. Z. Chang, et al., "Experimental Observation of the Quantum Anomalous Hall Effect in a Magnetic 
Topological Insulator," Science, 340, 167, (2013).  
(5)  X. L. Qi, T. L. Hughs, and S. C. Zhang, "Topological field theory of time-reversal invariant insulators," 
Phys. Rev. B, 78, 195424, (2008).  
(6)  Y. L. Chen, et al., "Massive Dirac Fermion on the Surface of a Magnetically Doped Topological 
Insulator," Science, 329, 659, (2010).  
(7)  S. Y. Xu, et al., "Hedgehog spin texture and Berry’s phase tuning in a magnetic topological 
insulator," Nat. Phys., 8, 616, (2012).  
(8)  H. Beidenkopf, et al., "Spatial fluctuations of helical Dirac fermions on the surface of topological 
insulators," Nat. Phys., 7, 939, (2012).  
(9)  T. Kitagawa, T. Oka, A. Brataas, L. Fu, and E. Demler, "Transport properties of nonequilibrium 
systems under the application of light: Photoinduced quantum Hall insulators without Landau 
levels," Phys. Rev. B, 84, 235108, (2011).  
(10)  N. H. Lindner, G. Rafael and V. Galitski, "Floquet topological insulator in semiconductor quantum 
wells," Nat. Phys., 7, 490, (2011).  
(11)  J. I. Inoue and A. Tanaka, "Photoinduced Transition between Conventional and Topological 
Insulators in Two-Dimensional Electronic Systems," Phys. Rev. Lett., 105, 017401, (2010).  
(12)  O. V. Yazyev, J. E. Moore and S. G. Louie, "Spin Polarization and Transport of Surface States in the 
Topological Insulators Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3 from First Principles," Phys. Rev. Lett., 105, 266806, (2010).  
(13)  C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Rupont-Roc and G. Grynberg, "Atom-Photon Interaction", Wiley, 1992.  
(14)  E. Goulielmakis, et al., "Real-time observation of valence electron motion," Nature, 466, 739, 
(2010).  