Ewald-based Long-Range Message Passing for Molecular Graphs
Arthur Kosmala 1 2 3 Johannes Gasteiger 4 2 Nicholas Gao 2 Stephan G¨unnemann 2
Abstract
Neural architectures that learn potential energy
surfaces from molecular data have undergone fast
improvement in recent years. A key driver of this
success is the Message Passing Neural Network
(MPNN) paradigm. Its favorable scaling with sys-
tem size partly relies upon a spatial distance limit
on messages. While this focus on locality is a use-
ful inductive bias, it also impedes the learning of
long-range interactions such as electrostatics and
van der Waals forces. To address this drawback,
we propose Ewald message passing: a nonlocal
Fourier space scheme which limits interactions
via a cutoff on frequency instead of distance, and
is theoretically well-founded in the Ewald sum-
mation method. It can serve as an augmentation
on top of existing MPNN architectures as it is
computationally inexpensive and agnostic to ar-
chitectural details. We test the approach with four
baseline models and two datasets containing di-
verse periodic (OC20) and aperiodic structures
(OE62). We observe robust improvements in en-
ergy mean absolute errors across all models and
datasets, averaging 10 % on OC20 and 16 % on
OE62. Our analysis shows an outsize impact of
these improvements on structures with high long-
range contributions to the ground truth energy.
1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have shown great promise
in learning molecular properties from quantum chemical ref-
erence data, speeding up inference times by several orders
of magnitude (Gilmer et al., 2017) while often preserving
the accuracy of their ground truth method. Unfortunately,
1Max Planck Institute for the Science of Light & Friedrich-
Alexander-Universit¨at Erlangen-N¨urnberg, Germany 2Department
of Computer Science & Munich Data Science Institute, Technical
University of Munich, Germany 3Department of Physics, Ludwig-
Maximilians-Universit¨at M¨unchen, Germany 4Google Research.
Correspondence to: Arthur Kosmala <arthur.kosmala@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright
2023 by the author(s).
despite recent success in understanding theoretically univer-
sal models (Gasteiger et al., 2021; Dym & Maron, 2021),
computational constraints still hamper GNNs in learning
long-ranged physical interactions between atoms: the stan-
dard notion of a molecular graph (if no hand-crafted bond
information is used) treats atoms as vertices and connects
them by an edge if their 3D distance is within a cutoff
hyperparameter (Sch¨utt et al., 2018). This can be a prob-
lem if more remote atom interactions contribute to a target:
they are long-ranged also on the graph, potentially relating
vertices many edges apart. There is ample empirical and
theoretical evidence of limited GNN performance in this
case, e.g., due to over-squashing (Alon & Yahav, 2021).
The GNN status quo is in sharp contrast to the reality in
molecular dynamics, where long-range interactions are an
elementary ingredient. A task at the heart of the field (and
of this work in particular) is to predict the potential energy
E(x1, . . . ,xN) based on the atom positions {x1, . . . ,xN }
in a molecule. Hand-crafted parametrizations of this map,
known as empirical force fields, distinguish between bonded
and non-bonded energy terms,E = Eb+Enb (Leach, 2001).
The bonded terms model the short-ranged nature of covalent
bonding with its complex, but highly local interactions. The
non-bonded terms, however, capture interactions with heavy-
tailed (typically power-law) decay in distance. An example
of such a term is the electrostatic interaction,
Ees =
X
i<j
qiqj∥xi − xj∥−1, (1)
where the partial charges qi quantify net electric charge
around atom i. Their attraction or repulsion decays inversely
with distance, and the energy is the sum of all atom pair
interactions. Due to its scale-free decay, simply truncating
such a power law with a distance cutoff can induce severe
artifacts in measurable thermochemical predictions, even
at outsized cutoffs (Wells & Chaffee, 2015). Instead, the
interactions of all atom pairs have to be included in the
sum. The technique of Ewald summation achieves this
efficiently. It decomposes the actual physical interaction
into a short-range and long-range part. The short-range part
can be summed directly with a distance cutoff; the long-
range part, while slowly decaying in distance, has a quickly
decaying Fourier transform and can be efficiently evaluated
as a Fourier space sum with a frequency cutoff (cf. Fig. 1).
1
Ewald-based Long-Range Message Passing for Molecular Graphs
⇅
distancecutoff
frequencycutoff
??LJ
+=real space
Fourierspace=+
fullshort-rangelong-range
J
Figure 1. Ewald decomposition of an interaction, exhibiting ∥xi −
xj∥−1 decay in this example, into short- and long-range parts.
This work lays out a bridge between Ewald summation
and the current landscape of GNN models. Our proposed
method of Ewald message passing (Ewald MP) is a general
framework that complements existing GNN layers in anal-
ogy to how the frequency-truncated long-range part com-
plements the distance-truncated short-range part in Ewald
summation. It is architecture-agnostic and computationally
efficient, which we demonstrate by implementing and test-
ing it as a modification on top of existing GNN models. Our
experiments on the periodic structures of the OC20 dataset
and the aperiodic structures of the OE62 dataset indicate
robust improvements in energy mean absolute errors averag-
ing 10 %and 16 %OC20 and OE62, respectively. Moreover,
we study the tradeoff of these improvements against runtime
and parameter count and find that it cannot be consistently
replicated by any tested baseline setting. In a closer exami-
nation of the OE62 results, we observe that Ewald message
passing recovers the effects of DFT-D3, a hand-crafted long-
range correction term. This supports our claim that the
method targets the learning of long-range interactions in
particular. In summary, our contributions are:
• The new framework ofEwald message passing, which
is readily integrated with existing GNN models.
• Insights abouts its cost-performance tradeoff in com-
parison to the wider GNN design landscape.
• A study underscoring the utility of Ewald message
passing as a long-range correction scheme.
2. Background
Message passing neural networks. MPNNs were intro-
duced by Gilmer et al. (2017) as a conceptual framework
covering many molecular GNN architectures. Molecules
are represented as graphs with atoms i as vertices. Atoms
are adjacent, j ∈ N (i), if ∥xi − xj∥ < c x, where cx is the
distance cutoff. An MPNN first featurizes atoms as embed-
dings h0
i ∈ RF based on local atom properties alone. Next,
it models the complex atomic interactions by iteratively
updating the embeddings in message and update steps,
M(l+1)
i =
X
j∈N(i)
fint

h(l)
i , h(l)
j , e(ij)

, (2)
h(l+1)
i = fupd

h(l)
i , M(l+1)
i

, (3)
where the message sum M(l+1)
i gathers information from
the neighborhood N (i), using a function fint that depends
on current embeddings and edge features e(ij) (e.g., pair-
wise distances). Next, a learnable function fupdate processes
the message sums. A readout step then generates outputs
(e.g., atom-wise energy contributions) from the embeddings.
We develop the core framework of Ewald message passing
around a particular type of message step, the continuous-
filter convolution (Sch¨utt et al., 2018):
M(l+1)
i =
X
j ∈ N(i)
h(l)
j · Φ(l)(∥xi − xj∥), (4)
where · acts component-wise in the feature dimension, and
Φ(l)(∥·∥): R3 − →RF is a stack of F learned, radial filters.
In every channel 1 ≤ d ≤ F , Φ(l)
d (∥·∥) learns attending to
fuzzy distance ranges around an atom, allowing regression
tasks on continuously varying molecular geometries.
ℎ"
ℎ"#
1
⋱
⋱ℎ%&'
&(&)
⋱
⋱⋮ℎ%#
⋮
Figure 2. Schematic illustration
of periodic boundary conditions.
Periodic systems. The
inadequacy of a distance
cutoff for generic inter-
actions becomes partic-
ularly apparent in mate-
rials, where interatomic
distances are unbounded.
Periodic boundary condi-
tions (PBC) can be used
to approximate an infi-
nite system as repeating
copies of a finite atom
collection (cf. Fig. 2), tiling up space within supercells1
spanned by the lattice vectors (v1, v2, v3) ∈ R3×3. Let
S = {(h1, x1), . . .(hN , xN)} denote the atom embeddings
and positions of one chosen supercell and let t ∈ Λ be any
integer shift on the supercell lattice Λ := {λ1v1 + λ2v2 +
λ3v3 | λ ∈ Z3}. Atoms i′ at xi′ := xi + t are called
images of i ∈ S , with the PBC fixing hi′ ≡ hi.
Under PBC, generic message sums become infinite series
as every image may contribute a message. Previous MPNN
work on materials mitigates this issue with a distance cutoff,
alongside a multigraph representation that avoids storing
redundant hi′ on separate vertices (Xie & Grossman, 2018;
Chanussot et al., 2021; Cheng et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021).
1A supercell should not be confused with the unit cell of a
crystalline material. Unit cell translation symmetry is broken in
non-equilibrium structures, but PBC are still applied, with a typical
supercell containing multiple unit cells.
2
Ewald-based Long-Range Message Passing for Molecular Graphs
3. Ewald Message Passing
Analogy to electrostatics. The reason why Ewald summa-
tion can be applied to MPNNs is a formal correspondence
between electrostatics-type interactions and continuous-
filter convolutions. Previous work has highlighted this anal-
ogy as a useful source of inductive bias (Anderson et al.,
2019). The connection becomes clear if we take Eq. (1) for
the electrostatic energy Ees and express it in a new notation
alluding to the continuous-filter convolution of Eq. (4):
Ees = 1
2
NX
i=1
qi · V es
i (xi), (5)
V es
i (xi) =
X
j̸=i
qj · Φes(∥xi − xj∥), Φes(r) = 1
r , (6)
where N is the total number of atoms ( N := ∞ in mate-
rials) and we introduced the electric potentials {V es
i | i =
1, . . . , N} and the interaction kernel Φes. Compare the ex-
pression for V es
i to the message sum M(l+1)
i in Eq. (4): set-
ting the cutoffcx → ∞ (such that N (i) = {1, . . . , N}\{i})
and substituting
qj ↔ h(l)
j , Φes ↔ Φ(l), V es
i (xi) ← →M(l+1)
i (7)
puts F -dimensional embedding vectors in place of scalar-
valued partial charges as atom descriptors, and replaces
the simple, domain-informed 1/r kernel by a stack of F
learned convolution filters formally acting as interaction ker-
nels. Any continuous-filter message sum Mi (we drop the
layer superscript (l) from now on) can be canonically iden-
tified with a potential function Vi(xi) evaluated at source
atom location xi. Aggregating atomic output after just one
message-passing step would inductively bias the model to-
wards two-body interaction energies of similar form to Ees.
Several message and update steps in principle enable the
modeling of n-body terms (Batatia et al., 2022).
Conceptual outline. We now give an overview of Ewald
summation and show how it connects to our learning ap-
proach, Ewald message passing, based on the above analogy.
Ewald summation evaluates potentials (equivalently, mes-
sage sums) Vi(xi) = Mi given a PBC lattice, a generic
interaction kernelΦ: R+ → RF and generic atom “charges”
hi ∈ RF . We apply Ewald summation if Φ is long-ranged.
In this case, the naive distance cutoff approximation Mi ≈P
j̸=i,∥xi−xj ∥<cx hj · Φ(∥xi − xj∥) becomes inaccurate
for practically-sized values of cx. A slow distance decay
of Φ means that a significant part of its tail remains out-
side of cx, even for large cx. This long-range information
is subsequently lost by truncation. Ewald summation pre-
sumes a known decomposition Φ(r) = Φsr(r) + Φlr(r) into
a short-range and long-range kernel, where
• Φsr has fast decay in distance,
• Φlr(0) is well-defined, and ˆΦlr(∥·∥), the 3D Fourier
transform of Φlr(∥·∥), has fast decay in frequency.
By construction, atom sums over distance-truncated short-
range kernels Φsr
[0,cx] := Φ sr · 1[0,cx] (where 1[0,cx] is the
indicator function on [0, cx]) converge quickly for growing
cx, meaning that a distance cutoff can be efficiently applied.
This cannot be the case for Φlr, the leftover fat tail of Φ.
Ewald summation deals with this long-range sum over Φlr
by rewriting it as a sum over the Fourier transform ˆΦlr. Re-
placing ˆΦlr by ˆΦlr
[0,ck] := ˆΦlr · 1[0,ck], i.e., truncation by a
frequency cutoff ck, now admits efficient evaluation of the
long-range sum. Adding the short-range and long-range
sums recovers the sum over the full kernelΦ. Fig. 1 summa-
rizes the approach. Convenient decompositions satisfying
the above properties for all power law kernels are provided
by Nijboer & De Wette (1957).
Ewald message passing essentially flips the rationale behind
Ewald summation: instead of starting with a known physical
kernel Φ and searching for a decomposition with the above
properties, we seek to parametrize a filter Φ that is not
short-ranged. However, we impose that it can be fitted by
an Ewald sum over cutoff-supported short-range and long-
range kernels. The kernels are learned independently of
each other, ˆΦlr
[0,ck] is learned directly in Fourier space.
This section proceeds by rewriting the crucial long-range
sum as a sum over Fourier frequencies, bringing it into
a form that admits a frequency cutoff. This prepares a
subsequent in-depth discussion of Ewald message passing
and its implementation as part of existing GNN models.
Figure 4. Sketched surfaces of
constant phase for Fourier modes
exp(ikT x) at small k ∈ Λ′.
Frequency truncation.
From here on, we as-
sume that the long-range
sum runs over all atoms,
including target atom
i, and thereby denote
it by M lr(xi) (without
subscript-i, but highlight-
ing the dependence on
source atom position xi).
Note that this minor re-
definition turns the map
x 7→ M lr(x) into a peri-
odic function. We check
this by phrasing it as a double sum over the atoms of one
supercell S and the supercell lattice Λ:
M lr(x) =
X
t∈Λ
X
j∈S
hj · Φlr(∥x − (xj + t)∥)
= M lr(x + ˜t), ∀˜t ∈ Λ.
(8)
3
Ewald-based Long-Range Message Passing for Molecular Graphs
1. Fourier transform 2. Apply learned frequency filter
3. Inverse fourier transform
Atom embeddings
Structure factor embeddings
Within cutoff
Outside cutoff
[etc.]
Real space Fourier space
Figure 3. Three-part structure of long-range message passing: first, structure factor embeddings {sk} are evaluated as a Fourier sum over
atomsP
j∈S exp(−ikxj) [· ] and stored. Next, these are multiplied k-wise with learned filter values. Finally, an inverse Fourier sumP
k exp(ikxi)[ · ] scatters messages back to each atom i. Note the nonlocal all-to-one character of this scheme. If PBC are explicitly
prescribed, the Fourier domain is given by {k ∈ Λ′ | ∥k∥ < c k} with frequency cutoff ck. If not, it needs to be suitably discretized.
Thus, M lr has a Fourier series expansion (we use complex
exponentials as Fourier modes for notational compactness):
M lr(xi) =
X
k∈Λ′
ˆM lr
k exp (ikT xi) (9)
with Fourier coefficients ˆM lr
k ∈ CF (determined next).
Just as frequencies of a 1D Fourier series must be inte-
ger multiples of the basis frequency (i.e., form a 1D lat-
tice), the 3D spatial frequencies k ∈ Λ′ ⊂ R3 must
be integer combinations of three spatial basis frequen-
cies (w1, w2, w3) ∈ R3×3 spanning the reciprocal lattice
Λ′ := {λ′
1w1 + λ′
2w2 + λ′
3w3 | λ′ ∈ Z3}. Each basis
frequency amounts to a single-period phase shift along one
supercell direction and constant phase along the others, i.e.,
wT
i vj = 1 if i = j and 0 otherwise (cf. Fig. 4). The super-
cell lattice Λ therefore fixes the reciprocal latticeΛ′, and the
relations w1 = 2π(v2 × v3)Ω−1, w2 = 2π(v3 × v1)Ω−1,
w3 = 2π(v1 × v2)Ω−1 (with the cross product × and su-
percell volume Ω = vT
1 (v2 × v3)) are easily verified.
As our final ingredient leading up to a frequency cutoff,
we relate the Fourier coefficients ˆM lr
k to the 3D Fourier
transform ˆΦlr(∥·∥): R3 → RF of Φlr(∥·∥) – the kernel is
aperiodic unlike M lr(·), implying that its frequency spec-
trum is a continuous, radial function of k ∈ R3 rather than a
discrete set of lattice coefficients. In App. A.5, we derive the
identity ˆM lr
k = 1
Ω
P
j∈S hj exp(−ikT xj)ˆΦlr(∥k∥). Essen-
tially, Eq. (8) periodizesP
j∈S hj · Φlr(∥· − xj∥) by adding
all of its lattice shifts on Λ; in Fourier space, this periodiza-
tion maps ˆΦlr(∥·∥) onto a discrete spectrum by recording
its values only at PBC-compatible frequencies in Λ′. Insert-
ing this back into Eq. (9), and absorbing the prefactor 1
Ω
in our learned filter by redefining 1
Ω
ˆΦlr(∥k∥) 7→ ˆΦlr(∥k∥),
yields the desired long-range component of Ewald message
passing, a message sum over Fourier frequencies:
M lr(xi) =
X
k∈Λ′
exp(ikT xi) · sk · ˆΦlr(∥k∥), (10)
sk =
X
j∈S
hj exp(−ikT xj), (11)
with {sk ∈ CF | k ∈ Λ′}, which we call structure fac-
tor embeddings , as inspired by the analogous crystallo-
graphic quantity. If we replace ˆΦlr by a cutoff-truncated
Fourier space kernel ˆΦlr
[0,ck], we can limit the outer sumP
k∈Λ′ 7→P
k∈Λ′,∥k∥<ck
, while the inner sum computing
sk only extends over the atoms of a single supercell. The
resulting cutoff-truncated kernel is complementary to reg-
ular continuous filters (Eq. (4)): While they have no limit
on distance, the frequency cutoff does limit how fast the
filters can change in space. More specifically, their spatial
resolution is proportional to the inverse frequency cutoff.
Structure factor embeddings. Without a k-cutoff, the set
of tuples {(sk, k) | k ∈ Λ′} would hold equivalent informa-
tion to the set {(hi, xi) | i ∈ S} , i.e., fully quantify the hid-
den state of the model on a given input structure. This is seen
by viewing {(hi, xi) | i ∈ S} equivalently as an “embed-
4
Ewald-based Long-Range Message Passing for Molecular Graphs
ding density distribution”, ρ(x) = P
t∈Λ
P
i∈S hiδ(x −
xi − t), with δ denoting the Dirac delta distribution. Its
Fourier transform (in the distributional sense) is given by
ˆρ(k) = P
k′∈Λ′
hP
j∈S hi exp(−ik′T xj)
i
δ(k − k′) =P
k′∈Λ′ sk′δ(k − k′) which corresponds to the pairs
{(sk, k)}. Disregarding all sk outside a k-cutoff removes
fine-grained resolution information about the atom encoding
distribution below a scale ∼ c−1
k . In this sense, the structure
factor representation introduced in Ewald message passing
coarse-grains the hidden model state. Moreover, the em-
bedding information is represented non-locally since each
sk is a weighted sum over all supercell embeddings. This
all-to-one relationship is another way of understanding the
long-range character of Ewald message passing.
Ewald message passing. The combined usage of regular
short-range message passing via any GNN layer and the
long-range message passing in Eqs. (10) and (11) is called
Ewald message passing. This combination enables Ewald
message passing to express interactions outside of either
limited class. We combine the two message passing schemes
simply by adding up both embedding updates during each
message-passing step, for details see Eq. (12). This way of
integration works nearly out-of-the-box in our experiments.
Aperiodic systems. Many structural datasets containing
important long-range interactions do not feature periodic
boundary conditions. In this case, a reciprocal lattice that
would discretize the Fourier domain is not provided, which
in turn means the structure factor embeddings sk turn into a
function s(k): R3 7→ CF defined on a continuous domain.
The aperiodic case can equally well be understood as the
limit of infinite supercell size, corresponding to a continuum
limit of the reciprocal lattice as the basis frequency vectors
wi approach zero. As we can only represent s(·) and ˆΦ(∥·∥)
by a finite set of numbers, we need to impose a suitable dis-
cretization scheme ourselves. In our implementation, we
tile the cutoff region by a grid of cubic voxels and replace
all continuous functions by the set of their average values
within each voxel. The discretization resolution is controlled
by the voxel sidelength∆, a new hyperparameter that is rele-
vant for the aperiodic case. In our main experiments, we use
equal resolution ∆ = 0.2 ˚A
−1
for each tested model. Abla-
tion studies with other resolutions are reported in App. A.3.
Note that this approach preserves rotation invariance only if
the voxel grid sits in a coordinate frame that rotates with the
input structure. To this end, we use the orthonormal basis
obtained from a singular value decomposition, similar to
Gao & G¨unnemann (2022). In App. A.6 we outline a more
general mathematical framework for discretizing the struc-
ture factor, provide implementation-relevant details about
our voxel approach and discuss its relation to other possible
discretization schemes.
Frequency filters: aperiodic case. Thus far, we left open
how the frequency filters ˆΦ(∥·∥) are learned. In the aperi-
odic case, we parametrize filters as linear combinations ofS
radial basis functions { ˆψi(∥·∥): R3 → R | i = 1, . . . , S}:
ˆΦ(∥k∥) = W ˆΨ(k) with ˆΨ(k) = (ψ1(∥k∥), . . . ψS(∥k∥))
and the learned weight matrix W ∈ RF ×S. All basis func-
tions are supported within the k-cutoff radius ck. We use
Gaussian radial basis functions (Sch¨utt et al., 2018).
Frequency filters: periodic case. On OC20 we pursue
a non-radial filtering strategy that allows for a more lib-
eral use of the information provided by the PBC frame
(v1, v2, v3) ∈ R3×3 of a given input structure. This infor-
mation can be meaningful: given a material surface slab,
for example, the model should clearly “know” which direc-
tion is normal to the surface. This does not break rotation
invariance as the PBC frame rotates with the structure.
Since the reciprocal lattice Λ′ varies depending on the in-
put PBC frame, the number of frequencies inside any fixed
cutoff volume would also be variable. Motivated by our em-
pirical findings (App. A.3), we instead fix the number of fre-
quencies in each reciprocal basis direction (w1, w2, w3) ∈
R3×3, dropping the notion of a direct frequency cutoff. For-
mally, we define positive integersNx, Ny, Nz and consider
the product set I = ×j=x,y,z {−Nj, . . . , Nj} ⊂ Z3. We
limit the scope of the Fourier message sum in Eq. (10) by
only including frequencies with reciprocal lattice positions
in I. The model then learns a filter weight ˆΦλ′ ∈ RF for
each λ′ ∈ I. Since a general supercell lattice has at least
point symmetry, we moreover set ˆΦλ′ ≡ ˆΦ−λ′. This dif-
fers from the strict notion of frequency filters discussed
earlier: the filter weights ˆΦλ′ are not assigned to a fixed
point k in Fourier space, but to a position on the recipro-
cal lattice. The frequency corresponding to this position
kλ′ = λ′
1w1 + λ′
2w2 + λ′
3w3 varies with the basis frequen-
cies of each input structure. Note that this filtering approach
is not invariant under the “supercell symmetry” that maps
any supercell to its multiple across one or several lattice
directions while keeping atom positions unchanged. We
found that this does not affect empirical performance on
OC20. Still, a filtering approach invariant to this symmetry
(e.g. radial basis filtering) might be advisable for datasets
with large variations in supercell size.
Computational complexity. The three-part procedure of
our long-range message passing scheme, illustrated in Fig. 3,
has a computational complexity of O(NatNk), where Nat is
the number of atoms in the structure (or supercell in the case
of PBC), and Nk is the number of frequencies contained
in the long-range sum. As the density of atoms in space
can be roughly assumed constant, the atom count increases
linearly with the supercell volumeΩ in the periodic case. By
the definition of the reciprocal basis (w1, w2, w3) ∈ R3×3,
5
Ewald-based Long-Range Message Passing for Molecular Graphs
the amount of frequencies k ∈ Λ′ contained within a fixed
frequency cutoff volume therefore scales linearly with the
atom count Nat. Altogether, this would amount to O(N2
at)
scaling if both cutoffs are left fixed. In the aperiodic case,
the same holds if we adapt the voxel resolution ∆ to the
finest features of s, which, by Fourier reciprocity, scale
inversely to the structural length. However, in contrast to
standard Ewald summation (Wells & Chaffee, 2015), Ewald
MP does not put any fixed relationship between cx and ck.
To achieve a computational complexity of O(Nat), we can
instead choose to fix Nk, which effectively varies ck ∝
N −1
at . Note that this approach can leave a “gap” of medium-
range interactions that are covered neither by the short-range
nor the long-range component of Ewald MP. Another way
to achieve sub-quadratic scaling would be adapting more
efficient Ewald summation variants to MPNNs (cf. Sec. 4).
4. Related Work
Hand-crafted long-range corrections. Approaches aug-
menting a short-ranged model by a long-range correction
make a frequent appearance in computational chemistry.
This often concerns corrections to density functional the-
ory (DFT), the method behind the OC20 (Chanussot et al.,
2021), OE62 (Stuke et al., 2020) and many other machine
learning benchmarks. DFT suffers from the same type of
problem as MPNN potentials: its standard functionals like
LDA (Jones & Gunnarsson, 1989) or PBE (Perdew et al.,
1996) cannot correctly express long-range effects such as
London dispersion (Jones, 2015). A zoo of interatomic dis-
persion corrections exists (Grimme, 2006; Tkatchenko &
Scheffler, 2009; Grimme et al., 2010; Caldeweyher et al.,
2019), which can be adapted for use alongside many DFT
functionals. From this historic angle, Ewald MP fills the
same demand for an inexpensive, out-of-the-box correction
in the MPNN context. Others have combined long-range
terms of various physics-based functional forms with short-
range models, including fully hand-crafted terms (Staacke
et al., 2021) and electrostatic terms with MPNN-predicted
partial charges (Unke et al., 2021). In contrast, our approach
remains entirely within the MPNN paradigm, focusing on a
fully data-driven modeling of long-range effects.
Non-local learning schemes. Ewald message passing
falls into the broader category of learning approaches tar-
geting non-local interactions in a structure. An example
of prominence well beyond quantum chemistry is atten-
tion (Vaswani et al., 2017). Whereas early approaches
in the graph domain apply the attention mechanism to
local node neighborhoods only (Veli ˇckovi´c et al., 2018;
Dwivedi & Bresson, 2021), others soon extended it to the
fully-connected graph (Ying et al., 2021; Kreuzer et al.,
2021; Mialon et al., 2021). A drawback of such standard,
fully-connected graph attention is its O(N2) scaling in
structure size. However, models using subquadratic alter-
ations of standard attention have been proposed, including
an O(N log(N)) non-local aggregation scheme (Liu et al.,
2022), as well as linearly-scaling modified attention layers
for both chemistry (Unke et al., 2021; Frank et al., 2022) and
generic graph applications (Ramp´aˇsek et al., 2022). Shallow
models such as Gaussian-process-based sGDML (Chmiela
et al., 2018) also typically use locality approximations, mo-
tivating recent effort towards their nonlocal extension by
Chmiela et al. (2023). Such approaches are mostly orthogo-
nal to the MPNN line of research and not directly informed
by a computational physics technique as with Ewald MP.
Use of long-range sums. Some MPNN-based works share
our approach of computing multiple message sums, in anal-
ogy to the physical separation of hand-crafted energies into
bonded and non-bonded terms. They likewise use a more
complex short-range part which includes higher-order geo-
metric information like bond (Zhang et al., 2020) or even di-
hedral angles (Gasteiger et al., 2022b), and a simpler, purely
radial atom-to-atom long-range part. However, the long-
range part in both works is a standard distance-truncated
message sum in a larger atomic neighborhood, thereby pre-
cluding the scaling advantage and physical inductive bias
achievable with Ewald summation. Apart from this, two
concurrent works exist which combine forms of Ewald sum-
mation with MPNN models. Lin et al. (2023) use it in a tra-
ditional sense to compute fixed-form physical potentials for
downstream use as physics-informed edge features, rather
than as a free-form ansatz for the learning of continuous-
filter messages. Yu et al. (2022) share our notion of learnable
Fourier space filters, but compute a scalar-valued structure
factor instead of structure factor embeddings. More gener-
ally, Yu et al. (2022) do not use the Ewald part as a GNN
message passing step with feedback onto the base GNN
embeddings, but rather apply it once and then combine it
with the short-range GNN output after its final layer. Both
Ewald-related works exclusively consider the periodic case.
Ewald summation. Ewald summation is a technique for
the summation of long-range interactions. The concept dates
back to work in theoretical physics from over a century ago
(Ewald, 1921) and has been adapted various times to encom-
pass more general interactions (Nijboer & De Wette, 1957;
Laino & Hutter, 2008; Mazars, 2010). Further development
has focused on the numerically efficient evaluation of the
long-range sum. While direct Ewald summation with opti-
mized distance and frequency cutoffs has N
3
2 scaling in the
atom number (Wells & Chaffee, 2015), approaches using the
Fast Fourier Transform (Darden et al., 1993; York & Yang,
1994; Essmann et al., 1995) bring it down to N log(N). In
this work, we focus on introducing the general method of
Ewald message passing, and consider numerical improve-
ments an interesting route for future work.
6
Ewald-based Long-Range Message Passing for Molecular Graphs
5. Experiments
Datasets. The OC20 dataset (Chanussot et al., 2021)
features adsorption energies and atom forces for roughly
265 million structures, each one a snapshot from a DFT-
computed relaxation trajectory of an adsorbate-catalyst com-
bination under 3D periodic boundary conditions. We train
our models on the OC20-2M subsplit, which has been empir-
ically established as an efficient proxy for the full-size train-
ing set (Gasteiger et al., 2022b). The OE62 dataset (Stuke
et al., 2020) features, among other targets, DFT-computed
energies (in eV) for roughly 62,000 large organic molecules.
The energies account for the long-ranged London dispersion
interaction, computed via the DFT-D3 dispersion correction
(Grimme et al., 2010). Both benchmarks contain structures
with comparably large numbers of atoms (N > 100). OC20
features PBC, while structures in OE62 are aperiodic but
can reach large spatial extent (> 20 ˚A). This makes these
two datasets a strong testing case for the long-range im-
provements achievable with Ewald message passing.
Baseline GNN models. An overview of training and
baseline hyperparameters can be found in App. A.2. We
test Ewald message passing by modifying four mod-
els: SchNet (Sch ¨utt et al., 2017), PaiNN (Sch ¨utt et al.,
2021), DimeNet++ (Gasteiger et al., 2020) and GemNet-T
(Gasteiger et al., 2021). These are intended as a representa-
tive, but by no means exhaustive sample from the modern
GNN landscape. Guided by the settings used by Chanussot
et al. (2021), most baseline atom embedding sizes and cut-
offs are larger than the originally reported values to account
for the size and chemical diversity of our structures.
Ewald modifications. We aim to upgrade each baseline
architecture in a minimal way such that the Ewald additions
can be studied in isolation. All models except DimeNet++
update atom embeddings in each interaction block using a
skip connection. We simply add long-range message passing
using M lr
i from Eqs. (10) and (11) as another contribution,
h(l+1)
i = 1√
2
h
h(l)
i + f sr
upd (M sr
i )
i
7− →
h(l+1)
i = 1√
3
h
h(l)
i + f sr
upd (M sr
i ) + f lr
upd
 
M lr
i
i
,
(12)
where the short-range message sumM sr
i and update function
f sr
upd is specific to the short-range model, while f lr
upd is of the
same kind across models (architecture details in App. A.1).
For PaiNN, which also incorporates equivariant vector em-
beddings, we only upgrade messages between its scalar em-
beddings. As DimeNet++ does not pass messages between
atom embeddings by default, we add them to the model
with a default embedding block taken from GemNet-T and
update them purely by long-range message passing with a
skip connection, h(l+1)
i = 1√
2
h
h(l)
i + fupd
 
M lr
i
i
. We con-
catenate these atom embeddings with the atom-aggregated
DimeNet++ edge embeddings along the feature dimension,
prior to the atom-wise dense layer of each output block. Any
remaining differences among our Ewald modifications are
on the level of hyperparameters. Aiming for Pareto-efficient
baseline improvements, we choose numbers of included k-
vectors adequate to the cost of each baseline (see App. A.3).
Comparison studies. We test whether using Ewald mes-
sage passing alongside our baselines leads to significant and
robust improvements of the energy mean absolute errors
(EMAEs) on OC20 and OE62. We also measure the aver-
age runtime per structure (details in App. A.8) for every
model configuration and dataset to study how the benefits
of Ewald message passing compare against its runtime over-
head. Moreover, to establish a baseline for the long-range
improvements achievable by a mere change in hyperparam-
eters, we repeat the EMAE and runtime measurements in
a configuration without Ewald MP, but with increased set-
tings for the distance cutoff cx and maximum number of
message-passing neighbors Nmax (details in A.4). An ade-
quate comparison ideally means increasing these settings
to a point that roughly matches the Ewald modification in
cost. This is always possible for the periodic structures of
OC20. In the case of OE62, a setting of cx = 12 ˚A and
Nmax = 100 usually covers the entire molecule, meaning
that no significant cost increase can be achieved beyond this
point. We furthermore compare the Ewald improvements
against a test setting where the Ewald block, f lr
upd
 
M lr
i

in
Eq. (12), is instead replaced by regular pairwise message
passing with increased distance cutoff (similarly to related
work discussed in Sec. 4). Concretely, we substitute it by
a SchNet interaction block. In contrast to the increased-
cutoff variant from before, we now extend the cutoff for
this block only. As a final check, we study whether the
benefits of Ewald MP are significant beyond what follows
just from an increase in free parameters. On OE62, we mea-
sure the EMAE and runtime of baseline variants with more
atom embedding channels to recover the parameter count of
Ewald MP. For OC20, we point to the extensive hyperparam-
eter studies by Gasteiger et al. (2022a), which suggest that
changing embedding sizes by the small amounts relevant to
this work has negligible impact on OC20 EMAEs.
First off, our comparison studies on OE62 (Fig. 5) and
OC20 (Fig. 6) underscore the primary role of short-range
model choice in the GNN design landscape (consider, e.g.,
how DimeNet++ is pareto-dominated on OC20). At the
same time, the consistency of accuracy gains through Ewald
MP strongly encourages its use alongside any particular
short-range model. The associated runtime overheads are
at least comparable to, if not smaller than the runtime dif-
ferences between baselines. Meanwhile, the average Ewald
7
Ewald-based Long-Range Message Passing for Molecular Graphs
1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
Avg. Forward Pass Runtime per Structure [ ms]
50
55
60
65
Energy MAE [meV]
5.2%
10.6% 10.5%
0.25 0.50
100
200
38.2%
Figure 5. Cost vs. energy MAE on OE62. Ewald MP improves the
models by 5 % to 38 %. Increasing the cutoff performs similarly
for DimeNet++ and GemNet-T, but is even detrimental for SchNet
and PaiNN. Using a SchNet in place of an Ewald LR block works
well for SchNet and PaiNN, but leaves DimeNet++ and GemNet-T
unaffected. Increasing the atom embedding size has little effect.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Avg. Forward Pass Runtime per Structure [ ms]
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Energy MAE [meV] 7.3%
12.3%
10.4%
11.3%
Baseline
Incr. Cutoff
Incr. Embeddings
Pairwise LR Block
Ewald
Improvement
SchNet
PaiNN
DimeNet++
GemNet-T
Figure 6. Cost vs. energy MAE on OC20, averaged across test
splits. Ewald MP consistently improves all models and signifi-
cantly outperforms the two baseline settings featuring an increased
global cutoff as well as a standard pairwise (here: SchNet) block
with increased distance cutoff in place of the Ewald LR block.
improvements across all models (and all test splits in the
case of OC20) are 16.1 % for OE62, and 10.3 % for OC20.
Ewald MP achieves a better cost-performance tradeoff than
the large cutoff setting for all tested instances on OC20.
Interestingly, the large cutoff setting on OE62 has a very
comparable tradeoff to Ewald MP for the two baselines
which use edge embeddings, but has a detrimental effect for
the two models that only use atom embeddings. Quite the
opposite happens on OE62 if the Ewald block is replaced by
a SchNet block with increased distance cutoff: it is effective
for PaiNN and SchNet, but achieves no improvement at all
on the better DimeNet++ and GemNet-T baseline models.
Its cost cannot be further increased as the added SchNet
block already approaches full graph connectivity. On OC20,
it always has a neutral or detrimental effect. In contrast to
these two previous strategies, improvements through Ewald
MP appear robust – no detrimental effect is observed in
any tested model configuration. Finally, matching the free
parameter count of Ewald MP with larger atom embeddings
shows a negligible or even detrimental effect. Beyond these
empirical comparisons, we note in general that pairwise mes-
sage passing on a fully-connected graph (like our SchNet
LR block setting on OE62) inevitably scales quadratically
in structural size. Ewald MP, on the other hand, can prop-
agate long-range information subquadratically while also
providing a physically principled inductive bias (cf. Sec. 3).
Our results inform various design recommendations for fu-
ture use. Ewald MP appears to be more efficient on OC20:
similar relative improvements are consistently achieved at
about half the relative cost. This hints at periodic structures
as the more attractive domain of application. Given how
we integrate Ewald MP with a short-range GNN, it is rela-
tively cheaper alongside models featuring few but compute-
heavy message passing blocks (in our case, DimeNet++ and
GemNet-T). In such cases, adding a long-range message
sum to each block results in less relative overhead. Besides
energies, we also test for improvements of force MAEs on
OC20, which are consistent but small. This is to be ex-
pected, since the frequency truncation scheme of long-range
MP removes the fast-changing high-frequency contributions
to the potential energy surface, limiting its impact on the
energy gradients (forces). Further comments and numerical
results are found in App. A.7 and A.11.
Impact on long-range interactions. To test our hypoth-
esis that Ewald MP learns long-range effects in particular,
we leverage the fact that the energy targets on OE62 contain
an additive term, DFT-D3 (Grimme et al., 2010), to correct
for the long-ranged London-dispersion interaction. This
allows us to study the long-range component in isolation.
To evaluate the DFT-D3 term, we use the coefficient set rec-
ommended for Becke-Johnson damping and the PBE0 DFT
functional, as obtained from Reckien (2017). We proceed
by assigning all 6000 molecules in the OE62-val dataset
to one of 15 equally-sized bins according to the value of its
DFT-D3 correction. We disregard the two outermost bins
as they contain strong outliers. In each bin, we record the
statistics (bootstrapped means and68 %confidence intervals
with 10000 resamples) of the energy MAE for the baseline
and Ewald model variants. Fig. 7 shows that Ewald message
passing gives an outsize relative improvement for structures
with high long-range energy contributions. As an additional
check, we collect the same statistics as previously for a
model without Ewald modifications that is trained while the
DFT-D3 correction is added explicitly to the model output.
This provides a “cheating” model that only needs to learn
the short-range component, while the long-range component
8