arXiv:2406.17595v3  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  28 Oct 2024
Density-Based Long-Range Electrostatic Descriptors
for Machine Learning Force Fields
Carolin Faller, 1 Merzuk Kaltak, 2 and Georg Kresse 3, 2
1)University of Vienna, Faculty of Physics & Vienna Doctoral S chool in Physics, Kolingasse 14-16, A-1090 Vienna,
Austria
2)VASP Software GmbH, Berggasse 21, A-1090 Vienna, Austria
3)University of Vienna, Faculty of Physics, Kolingasse 14-16 , A-1090 Vienna, Austria
(*Electronic mail:
georg.kresse@univie.ac.at)
(Dated: 29 October 2024)
This study presents a long-range descriptor for machine lea rning force ﬁelds (MLFFs) that maintains translational and
rotational symmetry, similar to short-range descriptors w hile being able to incorporate long-range electrostatic in ter-
actions. The proposed descriptor is based on an atomic densi ty representation and is structurally similar to classical
short-range atom-centered descriptors, making it straigh tforward to integrate into machine learning schemes. The ef -
fectiveness of our model is demonstrated through comparati ve analysis with the long-distance equivariant (LODE) 1
descriptor. In a toy model with purely electrostatic intera ctions, our model achieves errors below 0.1%, worse than
LODE but still very good.
For real materials, we perform tests for liquid NaCl, rock sa lt NaCl, and solid zirconia. For NaCl, the present de-
scriptors improve on short-range density descriptors, red ucing errors by a factor of two to three and coming close to
message-passing networks. However, for solid zirconia, no improvements are observed with the present approach,
while message-passing networks reduce the error by almost a factor of two to three. Possible shortcomings of the
present model are brieﬂy discussed.
I. INTRODUCTION
Machine learning force ﬁelds (MLFFs) are a powerful tool
for accurately and efﬁciently predicting inter-atomic pot en-
tials, approaching the precision of ab-initio calculation s2–21.
MLFFs describe the potential energy as a function of descrip -
tors that represent the atomic structure of a given material .
To increase the efﬁciency of MLFFs, many methods rely on
local descriptors that solely represent the atomic environ ment
in the vicinity of an atom within a speciﬁed cutoff sphere.
These methods assume that all interactions between atoms
further apart than the cutoff radius are negligible. While
this approach accurately describes many materials and
their properties, it neglects long-range interactions suc h as
electrostatics. This is because, in practice, it is impossi ble
to increase the cutoff radius arbitrarily. However, these
long-range interactions can be important 22–25, and new
methods that include long-range interactions are necessar y
to improve the predictive power of MLFFs for systems with
long-range electrostatics26–30.
This issue is widely recognized, and various methods
have been developed to address it. Recent models have
concentrated on speciﬁc types of long-range interactions,
such as electrostatics, and have introduced correction ter ms to
account for them 1,26,27,31–37. A common approach is to split
the energy into distinct parts and model them independently .
Then, all contributions are added together to calculate the
total energy. Short-range contributions are typically cal -
culated using a local model, while long-range components
are modeled with diverse approaches. One can either treat
the various energy terms separately and train two machine
learning (ML) models, adding up the ﬁnal energies, or utiliz e
combined descriptors and train a single model.
Many of these methods use classical (non-equivariant and or
even non-message passing) neural networks (NNs) 26,32,34–37,
or kernel methods 1,31,33,38. Deep NNs offer more ﬂexibility
but require more data for training and are generally slow
to train. Kernel methods are more convenient for small to
medium-sized problems, as they can rely on dense linear
algebra routines to solve the linear least squares problem 39.
Another approach to include long-range interactions is
to use short-range descriptors, but effectively propagate
interactions beyond the distinct cutoff by employing Messa ge
Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) 10,17,18,20,21,27,40–46. Other
relevant developments are equivariant MPNNs such as
NewtonNet42, DimeNet 43, TeaNet44, NequIP 17 and MACE18
that cover not only invariant but also tensorial quantities .
NewtonNet is designed to respect Newtonian mechanics,
ensuring the learned forces obey physical laws. It also inco r-
porates directional information from forces, enhancing th e
model’s accuracy 42. DimeNet employs directional message
passing, which allows it to capture complex interactions
effectively43. TeaNet uses tensor-based message passing,
facilitating the learning of intricate relationships betw een
atomic structures44.
NequIP17 employs equivariant convolutions of tensorial
quantities and multi-level message passing of equivariant
features, resulting in a particularly ﬂexible network topo logy
with many millions of parameters. MACE 18 is in most
respects a simpliﬁed version of NequIP usually relying on
only two message-passing layers and largely linear activat ion
functions. This should improve execution speed and learnin g
efﬁciency.
The present work utilizes kernel methods. Our objective is
to ﬁnd a physically meaningful and ﬂexible approach for de-
2
scribing long-range interactions without resorting to a gl obal
and non-atom-centered description. Similarly to short-ra nge
models4,47–51, the atomic density around each atom is ex-
panded into a suitable set of basis functions. However, we
implicitly account for all periodic images of all atoms in th e
supercell by performing the calculations in reciprocal spa ce
and using suitably slowly decaying basis functions.
This approach offers the advantage of a ﬂexible, physics-
based descriptor that is atom-centered but also long-range d.
It can be easily combined with a local descriptor, as both hav e
the same mathematical form, albeit in our present implemen-
tation the approach is not yet very performant.
We apply the present approach to a gas of point charges.
The descriptor is then compared to the long-distance equiva ri-
ant (LODE) framework 1 and the MPNN MACE 18 for liquid
sodium chloride and zirconia.
II. THEORY
A. Short-Range Descriptors
The descriptors used in this work are designed to resem-
ble the density-based Smooth Overlap of Atomic Positions
(SOAP)4 and Gaussian Approximation Potential (GAP) 47 de-
scriptors. The atomic density
ρ is calculated around each
atom j as a function of the atomic positions denoted as r. The
expansion coefﬁcients
c jJ
nlm =
NJ
∑
k=1
hnl
(
r jk
)
Y ∗
lm
(
ˆr jk
)
(1)
with
hnl (r) = 4π
( √
2σ 2π
) 3 fcut (r)
∫ ∞
0
χnl
(
r′)
(2)
× exp
(
− r′2 + r2
2σ 2
)
ιl
( rr′
σ 2
)
r′2dr′ (3)
from Ref. 48 that are given there in Eq. (18) and (19) are
used for building the short-range descriptors. Here, the ve ctor
r jk is the vector pointing from atom j to k, rk − r j. The
set of radial
χnl and angular Ylm basis functions are used to
expand the atomic density in order to obtain rotational and
translational invariant expansion coefﬁcients 4,47. The indices
l, m, and n are the angular, momentum, and radial index,
respectively. The parameter
σ is used to broaden the density
distribution. ιl are the modiﬁed spherical Bessel functions of
the ﬁrst kind, and NJ is the number of atoms of type J. The
cutoff function fcut is used to ensure a smooth decay of hnl to
zero at the cutoff radius.
The ﬁnal descriptor X j describing the local environment
surrounding atom j is derived by combining the invariant
(l = 0) two-body expansion coefﬁcients
c jJ
n = c jJ
n00 (4)
and the rotational and translational invariant three-body ex-
pansion coefﬁcients
p jJJ ′
nn′l =
√
8π 2
2l + 1
l
∑
m=− l
c jJ
nlmc jJ′
n′lm (5)
into vectors
X(2)
j =
(
ci1
1 , ci1
2 , . . . ,ci2
1 , ci2
2 , . . .
) T
(6)
X(3)
j =
(
pi11
110, pi11
111, . . . ,pi11
120, pi11
121, . . . ,pi12
110, . . . ,pi22
110, . . .
) T
(7)
that are then combined to
X j =
(
β (2)X(2)
j
β (3)X(3)
j
)
(8)
using the weights β for the two- and three-body descriptors.
In the present calculations β (2) =
√
0.1 and β (3) =
√
0.9 were
used for the short-range descriptors. Whenever inproducts are
formed in the kernel, the weights are implicitly squared, so
this results in a metric with "weights" of 0.1 and 0.9 for two-
body and three-body terms.
B. Long-Range Descriptors
The objective is to calculate a similar set of descrip-
tors where the expansion coefﬁcients however represent the
atomic density over long ranges and multiple supercells. Th e
same ansatz as in real space is used, where the expansion co-
efﬁcients are designed to represent the atomic density arou nd
each atom. As before, the descriptors are obtained by pro-
jecting the density onto a product basis of radial and angula r
functions. However, to avoid introducing a cutoff, the corr e-
sponding products are evaluated in reciprocal instead of re al
space:
c jJ
nlm =
NJ
∑
k=1
∑
G
exp(iG (rk − r j)) exp
(
− |G|2
σ 2
2
)
f ∗
nlm(G)
(9)
where G are momentum vectors consistent with the periodic
boundary conditions, and fnlm(G) are the basis functions in
reciprocal space and the other terms represent the broadene d
atomic density distribution of atom k of type J with positions
rk around atom j with positions r j. The central atom j may
be of any atom type present in the material. The translationa l
invariance is obvious from Eq. (9), as seen from the difference
vector rk − r j, where r j is the position of the central atom.
Starting out from the product of the radial χnl (r) and angular
Ylm (ˆr) basis functions in real space
fnlm(r) = χnl (r)Ylm (ˆr) (10)
taking the Fourier Transform (FT) of Eq. ( 10) and applying
the plane wave expansion yields
fnlm(G) = 4πilYlm(− ˆG)
∫ ∞
0
r2 jl(Gr)χnl(r)dr (11)
3
where the remaining integral can be either solved analytica lly
or numerically depending on the choice of radial basis
functions
χnl(r).
The long-range expansion coefﬁcients given in Eq. (9) have
the same form as the short-range expansion coefﬁcients give n
in Eq. ( 1). Like conventional two- (and three-) body descrip-
tors, they are also atom-centered and invariant under trans la-
tions and rotations. So for all practical purposes, they beh ave
and can be used like conventional short-range descriptors. For
example, the learned regression coefﬁcients are transferable to
different unit cells and do not depend on the choice of the Bra-
vais lattice. The only difference is that the evaluation of t he
expansion coefﬁcients c jJ
nlm is performed in reciprocal space.
This allows to cover arbitrary interaction ranges, and thus , to
encode and measure long-range density ﬂuctuations.
With the appropriate choice of basis functions (see next sec -
tion), the long-range expansion coefﬁcients can encode the
long-range density correlations. This is due to the calcula tion
in reciprocal space, where not only the position of an atom
is considered but also all periodic images of this atom. It is
important to note that these long-range descriptors do not r e-
quire a cutoff, but of course, it is possible to impose a cutof f
by using the FTs of ﬁnite-ranged real-space functions in Eq.
(
11).
The individual long-range expansion coefﬁcients are then
combined into a vector ("long-range descriptor"). In the
present work, we mostly use two-body expansion coefﬁcients
as shown in Eq. (
4) and the corresponding vector X(2)
j . The
three-body long-range coefﬁcients are excluded since the o b-
jective here is to describe long-range pairwise interactio ns.
Furthermore, we found no improvements when including
long-range three-body terms in any of the systems considere d
here. This might have many reasons, but we believe that three-
body interactions are generally shorter-ranged. Consider , for
instance, the case of V an der Waals (vdW) interactions: two-
body vdW interactions fall off like 1 /r6, and the three-body
terms (Axilrod–Teller) fall off like 1 /r9.
C. Long-Range Radial Basis Functions
The type of basis functions used for the descriptors has
not been speciﬁed yet. For the short-range method, spheri-
cal Bessel functions are used for the radial part and spheric al
harmonics for the angular part.
Spherical harmonics are also used for the angular part of the
long-range descriptor. However, spherical Bessel functio ns
cannot be employed to model the inﬁnitely ranged interactions
in the radial part, as to maintain a ﬁxed spatial resolution, the
number of Bessel functions would need to increase linearly
with Rcut.
Given the objective of representing electrostatic interac tions
that decay slowly like 1 /r, where r is the distance between
two atoms, it is evident that exponentially decaying functi ons
are a sensible choice. This is because
1
r =
∫ ∞
0
exp(− ζ r)dζ
≈
Nmax
∑
n=1
wn exp(− ζnr)
(12)
holds. The ﬁrst line of Eq. ( 12) is the Laplace transform of
1 resulting in 1 /r, while the second line approximates this in-
tegral using a quadrature rule. This demonstrates that the i n-
tegral over all exponentially decaying functions can repre sent
1/r, a fact that has been amply used in quantum chemistry to
deal with integrals in many-body perturbation theory 52–56. It
is important to understand that the 1 /r-function can be repre-
sented very accurately by the sum of exponentials 57. If both,
the decay constants and the weights are optimized indepen-
dently 6, 8 and 10 functions are sufﬁcient to represent 1 /r
with a maximum absolute error of 10 − 5, 10 − 6 and 10 − 7, re-
spectively, on an interval between r = [rmin, 100 ·rmin]. More
functions are required as the required range increases, but the
number of functions increases slowly. It is also found that t he
optimal decay constants are typically exponentially space d,
with the typical factor between successive decay constants be-
ing close to two. We, therefore, expect that if the shortest
nearest neighbor distance is around, say, 2 Å, then about 6-8
functions should be sufﬁcient to describe long-range inter ac-
tions up to typically 200 Å with very high accuracy.
For simplicity, we here deﬁne
ζn on a logarithmic mesh where
ζn = ζmax/sn− 1, (13)
and ζmax and the scaling constant s are hyperparameters de-
termined numerically. As already noted, this choice was in-
spired by our experience with many-body applications where
a roughly exponential scaling was also found to be optimal 56.
D. The LODE Implementation
Grisaﬁ and Ceriotti introduced the long-distance equivari -
ant (LODE) framework, which uses descriptors to encode the
electrostatic potential around atoms 1. The potential is calcu-
lated by summing the potentials induced by other atoms at the
position of the central atom.
In reciprocal space, the electrostatic potential Φ is given as
the negative product of the atomic density
ρ and the Coulomb
Kernel
Φ(G) = − 4π
∥G∥2Ω ρ(G). (14)
where Ω is the volume of the supercell.
Because of the relation shown in Eq. ( 14), it is relatively
easy, with the density-based model presented above, to im-
plement the LODE descriptors. The only required step is to
multiply the density-based expansion coefﬁcients by the nega-
tive Coulomb kernel before summing over the reciprocal grid
points G. Spherical Bessel functions are used as radial basis
functions for this LODE implementation.
4
As in the original work of Grisaﬁ and Ceriotti, for real ma-
terials, the LODE descriptors are combined with short-rang e
descriptors as well, using the approach shown in the following
section.
E. Combination of Short- and Long-Range Descriptors
To apply the models to realistic materials in which both
short-range and long-range interactions are present, the ﬁ -
nal descriptor vectors X must contain information about both
types of interaction. By simply appending the short-range d e-
scriptors Xsr and long-range descriptors Xlr the ﬁnal descrip-
tor
X =
[
XT
sr, XT
lr
] T
(15)
is obtained. This descriptor contains all the necessary in-
formation and still provides a unique similarity measure fo r
kernel-ridge regression.
As the long-range descriptors are very similar in construct ion
to the short-range descriptors, additional scaling was fou nd to
be irrelevant for them. However, to obtain an accurate MLFF
involving LODE, we found it crucial to optimize the weight
of the LODE descriptors using a hyper-parameter search, as
the LODE descriptors have a potentially very different scal e
as other descriptors.
F. The Fitting Process
The ﬁtting process of our model employs the methods of
polipy4vasp, the code used in Ref. 58. These methods are im-
plemented analogously to those of the Vienna Ab initio Simu-
lation Package (V ASP)59–61 which are presented in Refs. 48–
50.
The following paragraphs provide a brief overview of the
main points of the scheme. It is assumed that there is a non-
linear functional mapping of the ﬁnal descriptors obtained as
described above to the total energy of the system. As usual,
it is furthermore assumed that the energy U of the system can
be decomposed into the sum
U = ∑
j
U j (16)
of local energy contributions U j that depend on the "local"
environment around each atom j. Kernel regression is used
to describe the non-linear dependence of the energy on the
descriptors, and a sparse representation is used for the ker nel.
Either a Gaussian (radial basis function) kernel
K(X j, Xb) = exp
(
− ∥X j − Xb∥2
η 2
)
(17)
or a polynomial kernel
K(X j, Xb) =
( ˆX j · ˆXb
) ζ
(18)
is used here.
In Eq. (
18) ˆX indicates that the descriptor X is normalized.
The index b in both Eq. ( 17) and Eq. ( 18) refers to the kernel
basis function to which the descriptor of the current centra l
atom X j is "compared".
The energy per atom of structure s containing Natom atoms
is obtained when the following equation is fulﬁlled in the least
squares sense:
U s
Nsatom
!=
Nsatom
∑
j=1
U j
Nsatom
=
Nb
∑
b=1
wb
Nsatom
∑
j=1
K(Xs
j, Xb)
Nsatom
. (19)
Here U s is the energy of structure s obtained from ﬁrst prin-
ciples (FP) calculations and Nb is the total number of kernel
basis functions. The energy U s is a linear function of the ﬁt-
ting weights wb. As the forces are the negative derivatives of
the energy with respect to the atomic positions, also the for ces
are linear functions of the weights wb.
These linear relations can be expressed as a system of linear
equations in matrix-vector form:
y != Φw. (20)
The vector y contains the energies of all training structures s
and all the forces acting on all atoms in the systems included
in the training data set obtained from FP calculations. Thes e
entries are made dimensionless by dividing them by the stan-
dard deviation of those energies and the forces, respective ly.
During training the linear system of equations is calculate d
via the pseudoinverse of Φ using a singular value decompo-
sition, and singular values smaller than a threshold of 10 − 9
times the largest singular value are disposed of.
G. The Root-Mean Square Percentage Error
In this work, all errors of training and test data are given
in terms of the root-mean-square percentage error (RMSPE).
This is calculated by dividing the root-mean-square error o f
the predicted properties by the standard deviation of the ex act
results multiplied by 100. With this approach, we obtain
a unitless measure that does not depend on the number of
atoms or the size of the unit cell. Typically, errors are give n
in (m)eV/atom for the energies and in eV/Å for the forces.
However, these errors cannot be easily compared between
different materials or at different temperatures. The RMSP E
simpliﬁes such comparisons.
III. RESULTS
For LODE the model with only pairwise descriptors
and a body order term of
ν = 1 is used. This facilitates a
comparison with the purely radial description of the densit y-
based long-range descriptors. Furthermore, it was found
5
that the use of three-body terms in our case leads to larger
errors compared to the use of only two-body terms. This is
likely related to the already discussed two-body nature of
long-range Coulomb interactions.
A. Long-Range Eﬀects of Point Charges
As an initial test set for the present long-range model,
a gas of randomly distributed point charges, analogous to
the one used in Ref. 1, was constructed. The set comprises
systems of varying volumes, each containing 64 atoms,
with 32 having a positive charge of +1 and the other 32
having a negative charge of − 1. To prevent large energies
the minimum distance between two atoms was set to 2 .5 Å.
The training and validation data were generated using the
Ewald energies and forces (as implemented in V ASP). Only
long-range descriptors were used for this system.
For all tests on this toy model the Gaussian kernel given in
Eq. (
17) with a broadening of η = 1.55 was used.
10−2 10−1
ζmin
10−1
100
101
RMSPE F (%)
s = 4, Nmax = 4
s = 3, Nmax = 4
s = 3, Nmax = 5
s = 3, Nmax = 6
s = 2, Nmax = 5
s = 2, Nmax = 6
s = 2, Nmax = 7
FIG. 1. The RMSPE in the forces for various values of the minim al
ζmin = ζmax/sNmax− 1 of the radial basis functions, scaling constants
s, and number of radial basis functions Nmax for the gas of point
charges. It is evident that the error reduction is primarily associated
with a decreasing scaling constant. All curves with a small s caling
constant of s = 2 yield a minimum at ζmin ≈ 0.09. Exponents larger
than this minimum value are insufﬁciently long-ranged to ca pture
long-range electrostatic interactions accurately.
The ﬁrst step is to determine the radial basis functions.
This involves optimizing three parameters: the number of
radial basis functions Nmax, the maximal exponent
ζmax, and
the scaling constant s. A grid search of these parameters was
performed.
Figure
1 shows the minimal exponents ζmin = ζmax/sNmax− 1
on the x-axis and the corresponding error in the force pre-
dictions on the y-axis. Each line represents a distinct set o f
maximal exponents,
ζmax, ranging from 12 to 0 .9 and is asso-
ciated with a speciﬁc value of Nmax and s. The linestyle and
color of the lines indicate the value of Nmax and s, respectively.
Overall, reducing the scaling constant s reduces the
RMSPE. This is because a smaller scaling constant results
in a denser distribution of radial basis functions, allowin g
for better a description of the electrostatic kernel (1 /r). For
the electrostatic interactions to be accurately described , it
is necessary to have a sufﬁcient number of basis functions
such that they decay sufﬁciently slowly. We see a more or
less pronounced minimum around
ζmin ≈ 0.09. The second
minimum to the left corresponds to the case that the second
smallest
ζ becomes approximately 0 .09. For ζ , the inclusion
of values smaller than 0 .09 is unnecessary for this speciﬁc
training set but also does not signiﬁcantly degrade the qual ity
of the ﬁt.
The plot shows a steep increase in error on the right-hand
side, indicating that the smallest exponent is insufﬁcient to
capture relevant long-range electrostatic interactions. This
occurs when the radial basis function with the smallest
exponent decays too quickly and the basis functions are
unable to model the relevant interactions.
We found that with a scaling constant of s = 2 and 6 radial
basis functions, relative errors of approximately 0 .1% are
achieved.
The values Nmax = 6, s = 2 and
ζmax = 2 are the optimal
choices among all possible values for this speciﬁc test syst em,
but depend somewhat on the cell size and shortest distance.
These hyperparameters will be used in the subsequent cal-
culations. Similar tests must be conducted to determine the
optimal set of these three hyperparameters for other materi als.
However, the values obtained here provide a good starting
point, which can help avoid extensive grid searches.
Next, we compare our approach with the LODE method,
which is implemented in the way presented in
II D. It is
known from theoretical considerations that the two-body
LODE descriptor is ideal for a system where only Coulomb
interactions are present 1. Consequently, using only two-body
descriptors and a single radial basis function for a small cu toff
is sufﬁcient. In this case one descriptor for each interacti on
pair (+1, +1), (+1, -1), (-1, +1), and (-1, -1) sufﬁces, as
these exactly represent the interaction of one positive or
negative point charge with all other positive and negative
point charges. In our case, the radial basis function, onto
which the potential is projected, is a spherical Bessel func tion
that is smoothly cut off at the cutoff radius.
The density-based descriptors are not optimal for this case ,
so we need to use more radial basis functions and expansion
coefﬁcients to learn the Coulomb interactions. However,
learning only pairwise interactions is sufﬁcient even usin g
density-based descriptors.
Figure
2 shows the learning curves for the two different
methods. The LODE method was tested with various
combinations of cutoff radii Rcut and number of radial basis
6
functions Nmax, resulting in different numbers of expansion
coefﬁcients, and potentially probing the electrostatic po -
tentials at points further away from the central atom. For
the LODE model, this adds irrelevant information for this
speciﬁc simple 1 /r point charge model.
The red line represents the ideal LODE descriptor, which
quantiﬁes the electrostatic potential inside the sphere of small
radius Rcut around the central atom. The electrostatic interac-
tion between two point charges i and j is given by
Vi j = 1
2
ZiZ j
∥ri − r j∥ (21)
where ri and r j are the positions of the particles and Zi and Z j
are their charges. Since the descriptors include informati on
about each atom type J the charges are not relevant for the
implementation and can be set to one. Then the regression
will essentially determine ZiZ j.
If one takes now the sum over all pairs (i, j) and over all atoms
the electrostatic energy E of the system
E = 1
2 ∑
i
Zi ∑
j̸=i
Z j
∥ri − r j∥ = 1
2 ∑
i
Ziφ (ri) (22)
is obtained as a function of the electrostatic potential at ri
φ (ri) = ∑
j̸=i
Z j
∥ri − r j∥ . (23)
This potential is exactly "measured" by the LODE descriptor
with one radial basis function if the cutoff radius is smalle r
than the minimal atomic distance (the Gaussian broadening
adds additional width to the source charges though). 1 The
use of a cutoff sphere is possible due to Gauss’s law: the
electrostatic potential at the center of the sphere can be
determined by a probe charge of ﬁnite size, as long as there is
no source term inside the sphere of the probe charge.
With a cutoff radius of 3 Å, the value measured by the single
descriptor does not correspond exactly to the value of the
potential at the center of the sphere. Hence, the electrosta tic
potential of point charges that enter the projection sphere
can not be determined accurately. This is why the blue line
levels off at relatively high RMSPEs. Generally, consideri ng
a Gaussian broadening of
σ = 0.3 for the atomic source
charges, a cutoff radius of Rcut ≲ 2.5 Å− 5σ must be chosen,
where 2 .5 Å is the shortest nearest neighbor distance in our
models and the factor 5 before σ assures that the broadened
charge has decayed to negligible values.
When using four radial basis functions (turquoise line),
a linear combination of the values of the descriptors can
approximate a
δ -function at the origin, although the model
requires additional training data to learn the precise line ar
combination that corresponds best to the δ -function.
When training only on energies and predicting forces
(as shown in Fig. 2 right panels (c) and (d)), the energy
predictions are mostly more accurate. However, the er-
rors in the predicted forces are notably higher and seem
to stagnate at some point. The same precision as in the
mixed training on energies and forces is never reached.
This indicates that the models require information about th e
forces to make highly accurate predictions for forces possi ble.
A comparison of our density-based descriptor (black line)
with the ideal LODE descriptor for point charges reveals
that the LODE descriptor (red line) is superior. While our
density-based descriptor yields satisfactory results, it is
necessary to employ more radial basis functions (speciﬁcal ly,
six instead of one) and perform a hyper-parameter search
to identify the optimal choice of
ζmax, scaling constant s,
and the number of radial basis functions. This shows that
our density-based descriptor, as predicted by theory, is no t
the best possible descriptor for this prototypical system.
Nevertheless, it is still capable of accurately describing the
interactions, albeit requiring more training data.
The LODE descriptor with one radial basis function and a
cutoff radius smaller than the minimal atomic distance (red
line) and the density-based descriptor (black line) can bot h
achieve errors below 1% when sufﬁcient training data are
used. The LODE descriptor requires only about 40 training
structures to achieve a relative error of 1%. The density-
based descriptor requires 250 training structures to achie ve
the same accuracy and then stagnates. We believe the stag-
nation at small errors is likely related to the condition num ber
of the design problem becoming very large, which makes it
difﬁcult for the pseudo-inversion to separate "noise" from rel-
evant data. Nevertheless, both models give very satisfacto ry
results. These are better than those typically obtained usi ng
machine learning, as the errors for MLFFs are typically in th e
mid-single digit percentage range (around 2 to 10%). The hy-
perparameters, such as the number of radial basis functions
and reciprocal lattice points, can be adjusted to increase t he
speed and memory efﬁciency of the computations while still
achieving excellent results.
B. Liquid Sodium Chloride
After demonstrating the models’ ability to describe system s
with purely 1 /r interactions, they were applied to real mate-
rials. Liquid sodium chloride (NaCl) was chosen as the ﬁrst
material due to the signiﬁcant difference in electronegati vity
between the Na and Cl atoms suggesting the presence of
non-negligible long-range electrostatic interactions. T he
combined descriptors capture both short- and long-range in -
teractions, enabling analysis of material properties depe nding
on both types of interactions.
The dataset for this material consists of 1014 different
structures, each containing 64 Na and 64 Cl atoms. The
conﬁgurations are taken from V ASP molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations with 50000 steps and a time step of 1.5
fs. During the MD, the material was heated from 1100K to
1400K using a Langevin thermostat. An energy cutoff of 350
eV was used. The P AW potentials used were "P AW_PBE
Na_pv 19Sep2006" for Na and "P AW_PBE Cl 06Sep2006"
7
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
RMSPE E (%)
(a)
T rained on energies and forces
(c)
T rained only on energies
101 102 103
training conﬁgurations
10−2
10−1
100
101
102
RMSPE F (%)
(b)
101 102 103
training conﬁgurations
(d)
Nmax = 1, Rcut = 1
Nmax = 1, Rcut = 3
Nmax = 4, Rcut = 3
density-based
FIG. 2. The learning curves for various LODE models using dif ferent cutoff-radii Rcut and number of radial basis functions Nmax and our
density model differ when trained solely on energies. The to p panels display the relative percentage error for energy, w hile the bottom panels
present the relative error for the forces. The left panels sh ow the results of training on energies and forces, while the r ight panels show the
results of training on energies only.
for Cl, considering seven valence electrons for each elemen t.
Table I presents the results for NaCl obtained using ﬁve dif-
ferent methods: purely local/short-range descriptors (Lo cal),
MACE without MP (MACE no MP), LODE combined with
short-range descriptors (LODE), long-range density-base d
descriptors combined with short-range descriptors (Densi ty)
and invariant MACE with one MP layer (MACE inv.) and
equivariant MACE with one MP layer (MACE equiv.). The
combination of short- and long-range descriptors follows t he
procedure outlined in Eq. (
15).
For the short-range part of the descriptor, the hyperparame ters
were set to σ = 0.5, Rcut = 6 Å, Nmax = 6 and Lmax = 3
where Lmax corresponds to the angular quantum number and
indicates the number of angular basis functions. For the
density-based part, the optimal choice was Nmax = 7, s = 2,
ζmax = 1.5 and σ = 0.3.
For the LODE minimal, we used a model that can describe
1/r interactions exactly ( Rcut = 1 Å, Nmax = 1 and σ = 0.3)
with the long-range part being weighted 40 times more than
the short-range part and the forces being weighted 3 times
stronger than the energies. A more ﬂexible LODE model
was also used, with a larger cut-off radius of Rcut =7 Åand
Nmax = 5, where the long-range part was weighted by a
factor of 0.003 compared to the short-range part (the LODE
descriptors show huge ﬂuctuations in the case of a liquid).
A polynomial kernel of order
ζ = 4 was used.
For MACE Rcut = 6 Å, descriptors with up to four-body
interactions, force weights of 1000, energy weights of 10 an d
100 epochs were used. After 80 epochs the energy weights
are increased to further lower the error in the energies.
Out of the 1014 training conﬁgurations always 20% were
used as validation data.
The density-based descriptors and Message Passing MACE
outperform the purely local method. LODE performs better
8
TABLE I. The root-mean-square percentage error (RMSPE) was
calculated for the validation data of liquid NaCl using comb ined
density and radial LODE descriptors describing the electro static po-
tential and a more ﬂexible one as well as local-only descript ors and
MACE18 with and without Message Passing (MP) as well as using
invariant (inv.) and equivariant (equiv.) features. Radia l cutoffs
of typically 6 Å are used. The results show that the density-b ased
approach outperforms the LODE method for real materials and is
as effective as MACE with invariant MP . Nevertheless, inclu ding
long-range interactions is essential as the purely local sc heme and
MACE without MP yield large errors.
RMSPE E (%) RMSPE F (%)
Local 7.7 12.6
MACE no MP 8.5 8.5
LODE minimal 5.6 3.7
LODE ﬂexible 7.0 11.0
Density 2.2 3.3
MACE inv. 3.0 3.1
MACE equiv. 2.1 2.2
than the local methods but not as good as the density-based
and MP models.
The likely explanation for the better performance of the
density-based approach is that the LODE is optimal for
purely electrostatic interactions, yet lacks the capabili ty to de-
scribe intermediate range interactions. In real materials , the
ZiZ j/∥ri j∥ = ZiZ j/ri j Coulomb interaction between particles
i and j is screened by the electrons, resulting in an effective
interaction
V =
∫ ZiZ j
∥ri − r′∥ ε − 1 (
r′, r j
)
d3r′. (24)
At very large distances the interaction will be screened
by the ion-clamped macroscopic dielectric constant
ε − 1.
However, at medium distance, the electronic screening is
less pronounced and the interaction approaches 1 /r. LODE
is designed to model a functional form of 1 /r only but can,
by construction, not model screened interactions that devi ate
from the functional 1 /r behavior. The present approach is
more ﬂexible as the functional form of the interaction is not
keyed into the model but rather learned.
Even increasing the cutoff radius of the LODE method to 7 Å
and using more radial basis functions (LODE ﬂexible) does
not improve the results. On the contrary, the errors in the
forces increase by a factor 1.3, indicating that the electro static
potential at points further away from the atom of interest do es
not add any relevant information to the representation of th e
atomic environment.
Even when the cutoff radius Rcut of the purely local
method is systematically increased to make the descriptors
longer-ranged the result never becomes quite as good as for
the combined density method or MACE. This is shown in Fig.
3. These data were calculated using the MLFF implemented
in V ASP . For the three-body descriptors a cutoff radius of 5
Å was used, since this yields better results than 6 Å. This
is also the reason why the initial value in this plot is better
than the one shown in Tab.
I obtained using polipy4vasp. In
polipy4vasp a distinction between two-body and three-body
cutoffs is impossible and the best compromise is found to be
6 Å. The initial error (9.8%) is comparable to MACE without
MP (8%) but requires us to perform a hyperparameter search
for the cutoff of the three-body terms. As shown in Fig.
3,
the error decreases as the cutoff of the two-body descriptor s
increases, reaching a value slightly below 5 % when the
cutoff is sufﬁciently large. In summary, naively increasin g
the two-body cutoff does not quite allow us to recover the
accuracy of the long-range models. Nevertheless, the prese nt
observations have prompted us to routinely use relatively
larger cutoffs for the two-body descriptors (8 Å), and fairl y
small radial cutoffs for the three-body descriptors (5 Å) in
V ASP as default.
6 8 10 12
Rcut (Å)
4
5
6
7
8
9RMSPE F (%)
FIG. 3. RMSPE in the forces as a function of the two-body cutof f
radius Rcut for NaCl for the short-range descriptors. Data was cal-
culated using V ASP . The local method cannot match the accuracy of
the combined density method or MACE even when the cut-off rad ius
is increased to 12 Å.
Furthermore, irrelevant information worsens the conditio n
number of the design matrix and the numerical stability of th e
problem.
Especially when considering long-range descriptors, it is cru-
cial to carefully select the information to be included. Ide ally,
all relevant hyperparameters should be optimized by a grid
search.
C. Solid Sodium Chloride
As a less demanding test, we investigate solid NaCl. To
construct a training set, a 128 atom fcc supercell was heated
from 200 K to 900 K in 100,000 steps (1.5 ns) for an NPT
ensemble. The same hyperparameters as for liquid sodium
chloride were used to ﬁt the data, except that the forces and