/BT/CR/CR/CT/D4/D8/CT/CS /C5/CP/D2 /D9/D7/CR/D6/CX/D4/D8
The HADDOCK2.2 web server: User-friendly integrative modeling of
biomolecular complexes
G.C.P . van Zundert, J.P .G.L.M. Rodrigues, M. Trellet, C. Schmitz, P .L.
Kastritis, E. Karaca, A.S.J. Melquiond, M. van Dijk, S.J. de Vries, A.M.J.J.
Bonvin
PII: S0022-2836(15)00537-9
DOI: doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2015.09.014
Reference: YJMBI 64857
To appear in: Journal of Molecular Biology
Received date: 8 July 2015
Revised date: 16 September 2015
Accepted date: 17 September 2015
Please cite this article as: van Zundert, G.C.P., Rodrigues, J.P.G.L.M., Trellet,
M., Schmitz, C., Kastritis, P.L., Karaca, E., Melquiond, A.S.J., van Dijk, M., de
Vries, S.J. & Bonvin, A.M.J.J., The HADDOCK2.2 web server: User-friendly inte-
grative modeling of biomolecular complexes, Journal of Molecular Biology (2015), doi:
10.1016/j.jmb.2015.09.014
This is a PDF ﬁle of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication.
As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript.
The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof
before it is published in its ﬁnal form. Please note that during the production process
errors may be discovered which could aﬀect the content, and all legal disclaimers that
apply to the journal pertain.
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 1 
 
The HADDOCK2.2 web server: User-friendly integrative modeling of biomolecular complexes 
  
G.C.P. van Zundert#1, J.P.G.L.M. Rodrigues#1, M. Trellet2, C. Schmitz3, P.L. Kastritis4, E. Karaca4, A.S.J. 
Melquiond5, M. van Dijk6, S.J. de Vries7 and A.M.J.J. Bonvin*,1 
  
1Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science – Chemistry, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands 
 
2Current address: CNRS LIMSI, 91403 Orsay France 
 
3Current address: Instaclustr Level 5, 1 Moore Street Canberra, ACT, 2600 Australia 
 
4Current address: EMBL Heidelberg, Meyerhofstraße 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany 
 
5Current address: Hubrecht Institute, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, the Netherlands 
 
6Current address: VU University Amsterdam, Faculty of Sciences, De Boelelaan 1083, 1081 HV Amsterdam 
 
7Current address: Physik-Department, Technische Universität München, James-Franck-Str. 1, 85748 Garching, 
Germany 
 
#Contributed equally to this paper. 
 
*Correspondence: Tel: +31-30-2533859; Fax: +31-30-2537623. 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 2 
Abstract 
  
The prediction of the quaternary structure of biomolecular macromolecules  is of paramount importance for 
fundamental understanding of cellular processes and drug design. In the era of integrative structural biology, one 
way of increasing the accuracy of mo delling methods used to predict the structure of biomolecular complexes is 
to include as much experimental or predictive information as possible in the process. This has been at the core 
of our information -driven docking approach  HADDOCK. We present here t he updated version 2.2 of the 
HADDOCK portal, which offers new features such as support for mixed molecule types, additional 
experimental restraints  and improved protocols, all of this in a user -friendly interface . With well over 6000 
registered users and 108000 jobs served, an increasing fraction of which on grid resources , we hope this timely 
upgrade will help the community to solve important biological questions  and further advance the field . The 
HADDOCK2.2 web server  is freely accessible to non -profit u sers at  
http://haddock.science.uu.nl/services/HADDOCK2.2. 
  
 
Keywords 
Biomolecular docking; Data-driven; Hybrid modeling; Protein complexes; Grid computing. 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 3 
 
Introduction 
Cellular metabolism is a highly regulated and adaptive system where proteins, the main participants, form a vast 
network of interactions collectively known as the interactome. Knowledge of the three dimensional (3D) atomic 
structure of protein -protein inte ractions is therefore critical for a fundamental understanding of cellular and 
molecular biology, as well as for rational drug -design. Unfortunately, solving such structures using classical 
high-resolution methods  (X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscop y) is not trivial, as each has its own 
limitations (e.g. protein flexibility, size, strength of the interaction). Considering the magnitude of the 
interactome, complementary high-throughput methods such as computational docking are necessary if we aim to 
close the structure gap [1]. The goal of protein -protein docking is to predict the structure of a complex starting 
from the individual structures of its components [2], which can either be experimentally determined or predicted 
[3]. 
  
Despite continuous adv ances in the field, the accuracy of ab initio docking – without using any experimental 
restraints – remains generally low [4]. Data -driven approaches such as HADDOCK [5,6], which integrate 
information derived from biochemical, biophysical or bioinformatics  methods to enhance sampling, scoring, or 
both [2], perform remarkably better. The information that can be integrated is quite diverse: interface restraints 
from NMR, mutagenesis experiments, or bioinformatics predictions [7,8]; shape data from small -angle X-ray 
scattering [9] and cryo-electron microscopy experiments [10]; and orientations of the individual structures in the 
complex from NMR residual dipolar couplings  [11], relaxation anisotropy [12] and pseudocontact shifts 
experiments [13]. The potential of data-driven docking is reflected in the success of the HADDOCK server and 
software in recent CAPRI experiments (Critical Assessment of Protein Interaction) [14,15], as well as in the 
number of structures deposited (>120) in the Protein Data Bank (PDB), which were calculated using our 
software. 
  
Five years ago, we introduced the HADDOCK web server to provide a user -friendly interface to the software 
and streamline its usage by non -expert users in the structural biology field [16]. Shortly after, it was u pdated to 
handle multi -body docking  [17]. The development of new and improved protocols and the inclusion of 
additional sources of restraints culminated in the recently released version 2.2 of the software, followed by an 
update of the web server interface s. Throughout the next section, we will provide an overview of the newly 
updated HADDOCK web server  and discuss the most relevant additions. The server is freely  accessible at 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 4 
http://haddock.science.uu.nl/services/HADDOCK2.2 to non -profit users upon registration. We conclude by 
presenting usage statistics of the server to demonstrate the usefulness and power of providing easy and free 
access to scientific software. 
  
Overview and advances 
The HADDOCK web server was created to facilitate the use of our docking software, by removing the burden 
of its installation and setup, as well as by providing validation routines for input data and options. In addition, 
since HADDOCK runs are computationally demanding, the web server offers the users access to sufficient 
resources - our local cluster(s) - to complete their runs within a few hours. A grid -enabled version of the server 
can be accessed via the WeNMR web site ( www.wenmr.eu) [18], which uses resources  provided by the 
European Grid Initiative (EGI) and the associated National Grid Initiatives (NGIs). This setup, which currently 
handles most submissions, provides more than 110.000 CPU cores distributed over 41 sites worldwide (see  
http://gstat.egi.eu/gstat/geo/openlayers#/VO/enmr.eu).  
The HADDOCK web server aggregates seven different interfaces, each associated with a different level of 
control over the docking protocol reflected by the number of parameters that can be changed. New users are 
granted access to the Easy and the associated Prediction Interface only, but can request access to the Expert and 
Guru levels, and their associated interfaces, if necessary. 
The Easy interface provides the most basic level of control. It allows the user to either upload two structures in 
PDB format or download them directly from the RCSB PDB, and define sets of active and passive residues that 
represent the (putative) interface. Unlike previous versions, HADDOCK 2.2 supports single (protein, small 
molecule, RNA, or DNA) and mixed (protein -DNA, protein -RNA) molecule types. This was implemented to 
handle the docking of proteins onto a nucleosome complex - a recent CAPRI target. 
The Expert interface builds on the Easy interface and allows the user to manually specify the protonation state 
of each histidin e residue in the proteins, which is otherwise determined automatically with MolProbity [19]. 
Also, it offers control over which regions of the molecules are semi -flexible and fully flexible segments, which 
has an impact during the refinement stage of the d ocking. Lastly, the user is given the option to define the 
charge state of the N - and C-terminus of the protein. The Expert interface also provides a Distance Restraints 
section, where the user has the option to upload user -defined ambiguous and unambiguous restraints files and/or 
use center-of-mass restraints, useful for blind or ab initio docking when no other information is available, but 
also to ensure compactness of the generated models. The center -of-mass restraints are automatically generated 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 5 
by calculating the dimensions of each molecule along the x, y and z -axis (  ,   ,   ) and summing the average 
of the two smallest components per molecule. The resulting  distance is used to define a  restraint between the 
center of mass of each subunit with a n additional upper bound correction  of 1Å [9]. In addition, the Expert 
interface gives control over the Sampling Parameters, including namely the number of structures to generate at 
each stage and whether or not to perform solvated docking  [20,21,23]. Finally, it exposes the Clustering 
Parameters that define the clustering algorithm and cutoff. In version 2.2, in addition to RMSD -based 
clustering, there is the option of using the Fraction of Common Contacts (FCC) clustering algorithm [23], which 
is significantly faster and especially useful for symmetric complexes. 
The Guru interface gives full access and control to ~500 parameters, nearly all that are available in HADDOCK. 
The Distance Restraints section now offers a new radius of gyration restraint, in formation that can be extracted, 
for example, from SAXS experiments. Non-crystallographic Symmetry Restraints  and Symmetry Restraints are 
also available at this level and have been extended to handle C4 - and D2-symmetries in addition to the already 
available C2-, C3- and C5-symmetries. There are additional sections for other types of NMR -based restraints, 
such as Residual Dipolar Couplings [11], Relaxation Anisotropy  [12], and the recently added Pseudo Contact 
Shifts [13]. These latter require a tensor dist ance restraints file and the definition of the rhombic and axial 
components of the anisotropic tensor. Besides the restraints, all the energy evaluations, scoring functions  and 
analysis parameters can be tweaked; advanced parameters for the sampling protoc ols are also available at this 
level, offering a greater degree of control, for example, on the extent of each refinement stage. There are also 
dedicated options to the solvated docking protocol, which now uses by default propensities based on the Kyte -
Doolittle hydrophobicity scale, as these have been shown to improve the protocol [21]. The original statistical -
based propensities  [20], recently expanded to include nucleotides  [22], can still be selected via a dropdown 
menu. 
The remaining four interfaces consist of: the Prediction Interface , which is similar to the Easy interface, but 
with settings geared towards using bioinformatics interface predictors such as CPORT [7]; the Refinement 
Interface (expert-level access), which runs only the water refinement stage on the uploaded structures and can 
be used for scoring purposes; the Multi-body Interface, based on the Guru interface, supporting upload of up to 
six molecules that will be docked simultaneously  [17] and also featuring  the Molecule Interaction Matrix  
section. This new addition displays a table with scaling factors to adjust the interaction forces between different 
subunits, allowing molecules to become invisible to each other during the docking, which is useful in cases  
where multiple binding modes are required to satisfy the experiment data  (see for example [24]). The use of 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 6 
ambiguous interaction restraints within this interface requires the user to upload a restraints table file in the 
Distance Restraints section This requirement of uploading distance restraint files instead of supplying residue 
lists as in the other interfaces was meant to make users think carefully about their system since in multi -body 
docking multiple interfaces will be defined that might not all be supposed to interact. To facilitate the creation of 
custom ambiguous interaction restraint files between any number of molecules, an interface called Gentbl was 
created. Finally, the web server also offers a File Upload Interface to allow the user to upload a run parameter 
file, created upon successful validation and submission to the queue, and thus easily redo a docking run or re -
run it with slight changes in the parameters. 
  
At submission time, once the input data have been pr operly validated, the server offers the option to download a 
parameter file, and provides a link to the results page, which is also emailed to the user . Users are encouraged to 
save th e parameter  file since it contains  all required input data and settings to reproduce the docking, as 
recommended in the “Outcome of the First wwPDB Hybrid/Integrative Methods Task Force Workshop”  
(Recommendation 1)  [25]. The results page allows monitoring of the progress of the docking run. After a 
successful docking run, the user will receive an other e-mail redirecting him/her to the updated results page (see 
Figure 1  for an excerpt of presented results ). The page indicates how many structures of the water-refined 
models could be clustered , and list s the clusters in the order of their HADDOCK score . For each cluster , 
detailed statistics are displayed, representing the average values calculated over  the top four best scoring 
structures within each cluster. Besides the HADDOCK score and other standard energies (van der Waals, etc .), a 
z-score has been added. The z -score represents how many standard deviations the HADDOCK score of a given 
cluster is separated from the mean of all clusters, i.e. the lower the z -score, the better. To visualize the results , 
plots are displayed at the bottom of the results-page, showing for example the HADDOCK score of all solutions 
against the interface -ligand-RMSD (i -l-RMSD) compared to the best scoring structure, together with cluster 
averages and their spreads.  
 
Usage statistics 
Since its opening in June 2008, the HADDOCK web server  has seen a sustained increase in the number of 
registrations to reach over 6000 registered users to date distributed all over the world  (Figure 2). More than 
108000 runs have been processed, 28% of wh ich have run on EGI grid resources. This percentage has increased 
to 75% for the HADDOCK2.2 server submission. An overview of the number of runs processed per month with 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 7 
their distribution over local and grid resources is shown in Figure 2. Since the launch of the HADDOCK2.2 web 
server in March 2015, an increased fraction of runs are handled by the new 2.2 portal. Statistics over the last 
year (since January 2014) indicate that the portal is processing on average 75 docking runs per day. The 
execution wall time averaged over both local cluster and grid resources is around 16 hours per HADDOCK run, 
as approximately 75 runs are handled per day with up to 50 jobs running in parallel (and a maximum of 5 
concurrent jobs per user). The exact run time depends on th e size of the system being docked and the parameter 
settings and can vary between half an hour and several days. The server home page reports both the number of 
running and pending jobs, allowing users to get an estimate of the waiting time.  A majority of the docking runs 
are dealing with protein -protein and protein -peptide docking (~61%), ~19% correspond to protein -nucleic acids 
systems and quite a significant fraction (~20%) is dealing with protein -small molecule docking (both small 
ligand and oligosaccharides). These numbers demonstrate the popularity and widespread usage (both in terms of 
geographic distribution and type of systems being studied) of our HADDOCK web server.  
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The development of HADDOCK and its web server  have been suppor ted by grants from the Netherlands 
Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) (VICI grant  no. 700.96.442  and ECHO grant no.711.011.009) and 
by European FP7  and H2020  e-Infrastructure grants (e -NMR, grant no. 213010 ; WeNMR, grant no. 261572 ; 
EGI-Engage, grant no. 654142; INDICO -DataCloud, grant no. 653549 ). The European Grid Initiative ( EGI, 
www.egi.eu) through the national GRID Initiatives of Belgium, France, Italy, Germany, the Netherlands, 
Poland, Portugal , Spain, UK, South Africa, Malaysia, Taiwan, the Latin America GRID infrastructure via 
the Gisela project, the International Desktop Grid Federation ( IDGF) with its vo lunteers and the US Open 
Science Grid (OSG) are acknowledged for the use of web portals, computing and storage facilities. 
  
  
References 
  
[1] Petrey, D. & Honig, B. (2014). Structural bioinformatics of the interactome. Annu. Rev. Biophys. 43, 193-
210. 
 
[2] Rodrigues, J.P.G.L.M. & Bonvin A.M.J.J. (2014). Integrative computational modeling of protein -protein 
interactions. FEBS J. 281, 1988-2003. 
 
[3] Rodrigues, J.P.G.L.M., Melquiond, A.S.J., Karaca, E., Trellet, M., van Dijk, M., van Zundert, G.C.P., 
Schmitz, C., de Vries, S.J., Bordogna, A., Bonati, L., Kastritis, P.L. & Bonvin, A.M.J.J. (2013). Defining the 
limits of homology modeling in information-driven protein docking. Proteins 81, 2119-2128. 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 8 
 
[4] Huang, S.-Y. (2015). Exploring the potential of global protein-protein docking: an overview and critical 
assessment of current programs for automatic ab initio docking. Drug Discov. Today  8, 969-977. 
 
[5] Dominguez, C., Boelens, R. & Bonvin, A.M.J.J. (2003). HADDOCK: a protein-protein docking approach on 
biochemical or biophysical information. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125, 1731 -1737. 
 
[6] De Vries, S.J., van Dijk, A.D.J., Krzeminski, M., van Dijk, M., Thureau, A., Hsu, V., W assenaar, T. & 
Bonvin, A.M.J.J. (2007). HADDOCK versus HADDOCK: new features and performance of HADDOCK2.0 on 
the CAPRI targets. Proteins 69, 726-733. 
 
[7] De Vries, S.J. & Bonvin, A.M.J.J. (2011). CPORT: a consensus interface predictor and its performance in 
prediction-driven docking with HADDOCK. PLoS One 6, e17695. 
 
[8] Hopf, T.A., Schärfe, C.P.I, Rodrigues, J.P.G.L.M., Green, A.G., Kohlbacher, O., Sander, C., Bonvin, 
A.M.J.J., Marks, D.S. (2014). Sequence co-evolution gives 3D contacts and structures of protein complexes. 
Elife 3, e03430. 
 
[9] Karaca, E. & Bonvin, A.M.J.J. (2013). On the usefulness of ion-mobility mass spectrometry and SAXS data 
in scoring docking decoys. Acta Crystallogr. D. Biol. Crystallogr. 69, 683 -694. 
 
[10] Van Zundert, G.C.P., Melquiond, A.S.J. & Bonvin, A.M.J.J. (2015). Integrative modeling of biomolecular 
complexes: HADDOCKing with cryo-electron microscopy data. Structure 23, 949-960. 
 
[11] Van Dijk, A.D.J., Fushman, D. & Bonvin, A.M.J.J. (2005). Various strategies of using residual dipolar 
couplings in NMR-driven protein docking: Application to Lys48-linked di-ubiquitin and validation against 15N-
relaxation data. Proteins 60, 367-381. 
 
[12] Van Dijk, A.D.J., Kaptein, R., Boelens, R. & Bonvin, A.M.J.J. (2006). Combining NMR relaxation with 
chemical shift perturbation data to drive protein-protein docking. J. Biomol. NMR 34, 237:244. 
 
[13] Schmitz, C. & Bonvin, A.M.J.J. (2011). Protein-protein HADdocking using exclusively pseudocontact 
shifts. J. Biomol. NMR 50, 263-266. 
 
[14] Janin, J. (2005). Assessing predictions of protein-protein interaction: the CAPRI experiment. Protein Sci. 
14, 278-283. 
 
[15] Lensink, M.F. & Wodak, S.J. (2013). Docking, scoring and affinity prediction in CAPRI. Proteins 81, 
2082-2095. 
 
[16] De Vries, S.J., van Dijk, M. & Bonvin, A.M.J.J. (2010). The HADDOCK web server for data-driven 
biomolecular docking. Nat. Protoc. 5, 883-897. 
 
[17] Karaca, E., Melquiond, A.S.J., de Vries, S.J., Kastritis, P.L. & Bonvin, A.M.J.J. (2010). Building 
macromolecular assemblies by information-driven docking: introducing the HADDOCK multibody docking 
server. Moll. Cell Proteomics 9, 1784-1794. 
 
[18] Wassenaar, T., van Dijk, M., Loureiro-Ferreira, N., van der Schot, G., de Vries, S., Schmitz, C., van der 
Zwan, J., Boelens, R., Giachetti, A., Ferella, L., Rosato, A., Bertini, I., Herrmann, T., Jonker, H., Bagaria, A., 
Jaravine, V., Güntert, P., Schwalbe,H., Vranken, W., Doreleijers, J., Vriend, G., Vuister, G., Franke, D., 
Kikhney, A., Svergun, D., Fogh, R., Ionides, J., Laue, E., Spronk, C., Jurkša, Verlato, M.,  Badoer, S., Dal Pra, 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 9 
S., Mazzucato, M., Frizziero, E. & Bonvin, A.M.J.J. (2012). WeNMR: Structural Biology on the Grid. J. Grid 
Comp. 10, 743-767. 
 
[19] Chen, V.B., Arendall 3rd, W.B., Headd, J.J., Keedy, D.A., Immormino, R.M., Kapral, G.J. Murray, L.W., 
Richardson, J.S. & Richardson, D.C. (2010). MolProbity: all-atom structure validation for macromolecular 
crystallography. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 66, 12-21. 
 
[20] Van Dijk, A.D.J. & Bonvin, A.M.J.J. (2006). Solvated docking: introducing wate r into the modelling of 
biomolecular complexes. Bioinformatics 22, 2340-2347. 
 
[21] Kastritis, P.L, Visscher, K.M., van Dijk, A.D.J. & Bonvin, A.M.J.J. (2013). Solvated protein -protein 
docking using Kyte-Doolittle-based water preferences. Proteins 81, 510-518. 
 
[22] Van Dijk, M., Visscher, K., Kastritis, P.L. & Bonvin, A.M.J.J. (2013). Solvated protein -DNA docking 
using HADDOCK. J. Biomol. NMR 56, 51-63. 
 
[23] Rodrigues, J.P.G.L.M., Trellet, M., Schmitz, C., Kastritis, P., Karaca, E., Melquiond, A.S.J. & Bo nvin, 
A.M.J.J. (2012). Clustering biomolecular complexes by residue contacts similarity. Proteins 80, 1810 -1817. 
[24] Escobar-Cabrera, E., Okon, M., Lau, D.K.W., Dart, C.F., Bonvin, A.M.J.J. & McIntosh, L.P. (2011). 
Characterizing the N- and C-terminal Small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)-interacting motifs of the scaffold 
protein DAXX. J. Biol. Chem. 286, 19816-19829. 
 
[25] Sali, A., Bergman, H.M., Schwede, T., Trewhella, J., Kleywegt, G., Burley, S.K., Markley, J., Nakamura, 
H., Adams, P., Bonvin, A.M.J.J., Chiu, W., Peraro, M.D., Di Maio, F., Ferrin, T.E., Grünewald, K., Gutmanas, 
A., Henderson, R., Hummer, G., Iwasaki, K., Johnson, G., Lawson, C.L., Meiler, J., Marti -Renom, M.A., 
Montelione, G.T., Nilges, M., Nussinov, R., Patwardhan, A., Rappsilber, J.,  Read, R.J., Saibil, H., Schröder, 
G.F., Schwieters, C.D., Seidel, C.A.M., Svergun, D., Topf, M., Ulrich, E.L., Velankar, S. & Westbrook, J.D. 
(2015). Outcome of the First wwPDB Hybrid/Integrative Methods Task Force Workshop. Structure  7, 1156-
1167. 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 10 
FIGURE LEGENDS 
 
Figure 1: Excerpts from an example result page of a HADDOCK2.2 docking run.  
 
 
Figure 2: HADDOCK web server  statistics (as of September 1st 2015). The worldwide distribution of 
registered users (>6000) is shown with a blue-scale color-coding. On the top right, the distribution of the type of 
systems docked using HADDOCK is shown (taken from a HADDOCK online survey with >325 respondents). 
The middle bar graph shows the yearly increase in the number of registered users si nce 2010 and the bottom plot 
shows the number of processed user runs per month since last year (2014), distinguishing between runs that 
have been processed on our local resources or on the EGI grid resources, and between the previous and current 
(2.2) version of the server. 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 11 
 
Figure 1 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 12 
 
Figure 2 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 13 
 
Graphical Abstract 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 14 
Highlights 
 The HADDOCK webserver has been upgraded to use HADDOCK version 2.2. 
 It supports mixed-type molecules, e.g. protein-nucleic acid, such as nucleosomes. 
 NMR-based pseudocontact shifts and radius of gyration restraints are included. 
 The multibody and solvated docking protocol are extended. 
 The HADDOCK webserver counts over 6000 users and has served more than 100000 jobs. 