Current Biology 21, 2000–2005, December 6, 2011 ª2011 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10.1016/j.cub.2011.10.022
Report
Wiring Economy and Volume Exclusion
Determine Neuronal Placement
in the Drosophila Brain
Marta Rivera-Alba,1 Shiv N. Vitaladevuni, 2,4
Yuriy Mishchenko,2,5 Zhiyuan Lu,3 Shin-ya Takemura,2
Lou Scheffer,2 Ian A. Meinertzhagen,3 Dmitri B. Chklovskii,2,*
and Gonzalo G. de Polavieja 1,*
1Instituto Cajal, CSIC, Av. Doctor Arce 37, 28002 Madrid, Spain
2Janelia Farm Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, VA 20147, USA
3Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 3J5, Canada
Summary
Wiring economy has successfully explained the individual
placement of neurons in simple nervous systems like that
of Caenorhabditis elegans [1–3] and the locations of coarser
structures like cortical areas in complex vertebrate brains
[4]. However, it remains unclear whether wiring economy
can explain the placement of individual neurons in brains
larger than that of C. elegans. Indeed, given the greater num-
ber of neuronal interconnections in larger brains, simply
minimizing the length of connections results in unrealistic
conﬁgurations, with multiple neurons occupying the same
position in space. Avoiding such conﬁgurations, or volume
exclusion, repels neurons from each other, thus counteract-
ing wiring economy. Here we test whether wiring economy
together with volume exclusion can explain the placement
of neurons in a module of the Drosophila melanogaster brain
known as lamina cartridge [ 5–13]. We used newly developed
techniques for semiautomated reconstruction from serial
electron microscopy (EM) [ 14] to obtain the shapes of neu-
rons, the location of synapses, and the resultant synaptic
connectivity. We show that wiring length minimization and
volume exclusion together can explain the structure of the
lamina microcircuit. Therefore, even in brains larger than
that of C. elegans , at least for some circuits, optimization
can play an important role in individual neuron placement.
Results
Reconstruction from Electron Microscopy
Although the circuits of the ﬂy’s optic lamina have been a
target of manual reconstruction using electron microscopy
(EM) [ 6–8], testing wiring economy there requires a spatially
more detailed description than is currently available. In par-
ticular, a ‘‘2D’’ wiring economy model like the one used in
the next section also needs the sizes and positions of neurons
in 2D and, more importantly, each branch of branched neurons
must be represented separately in the wiring diagram. A ‘‘3D’’
wiring economy model would need, in addition to these data,
further detail of neuron and synapse placement in the three
spatial dimensions. To this end, we imaged 749 40 nm thick
serial sections of theDrosophila melanogaster lamina by trans-
mission EM (Figure 1 A; see Experimental Procedures ). Using
a newly developed semiautomated EM reconstruction pipe-
line [14], we obtained the three-dimensional shapes of all neu-
rons in a single lamina cartridge ( Figures 1B and 1C; see also
Figure S1 available online for the morphology of individual
neurons).
To obtain the connectivity matrix, we identiﬁed synapses in
the EM series and assigned them to presynaptic and post-
synaptic neurons. We found 477 presynaptic terminals in the
lamina cartridge, 57 of which were classiﬁed as uncertain
because they met the required criteria only partially ( Table
S1; see Experimental Procedures for criteria). Each presyn-
aptic terminal was apposed by several postsynaptic terminals
with the total of 1,407 postsynaptic terminals, 94% of which
could be assigned to identiﬁable neurons. The connectivity
matrix (Figure 2 A and Table S2 ; see Table S1 for a larger
version with different neuronal subtypes and location of syn-
apses in 3D) augments a previous manually obtained one
[6, 7]( Figure S2), revealing a complex network structure, with
approximately
one third of the possible connections realized
(Figure 2A). This complexity can be best seen in neuron-centric
subnetworks including an individual neuron and all of its syn-
aptic partners. The terminals of the photoreceptors are pre-
synaptic to 12 types of neurons and postsynaptic to seven
(Figure 2 B). Amacrine cells are interneurons with a rich con-
nectivity structure (Figure 2 C) that both receive and send
synapses along the length of a cartridge. For some neurons,
such as centrifugal cells C2 and C3, we found it helpful to in-
clude synaptic partners for both in the neuron-centric network
(Figure 2 D). C2 and C3 are mostly presynaptic in the lamina
conveying feedback information from the medulla, the second
optic neuropile. The large wide-ﬁeld neurons Lawf span sev-
eral cartridges and are mainly presynaptic but also receive
information from the photoreceptor terminals and neuron C2
(Figure 2 E). The large monopolar cells L1 and L2 that lie at
the cartridge axis have similar connections, except that L1 is
exclusively postsynaptic in the lamina, whereas L2 is presyn-
aptic to the L4 complex comprising the local L4 axon and the
two incoming collaterals of L4 from the neighboring cartridges,
as well as to L5 (Figure 2 F).
Wiring Economy in 2D
Insofar as the structure of the lamina cartridge varies little
along its length (Figure 1 B), we start by reducing a full 3D opti-
mization problem to a simpler problem in 2D. Most neurons are
columnar (Figure 1C), and have a simple structure, with a single
cylindrical vertical axon and lateral branches to connect to
other neurons (R1–R6, L1–L5, L4+x, L4 2y, and three amacrine
cell processes). The remaining lamina neurons include the 11
laterally directed varicose branches of Lawf cells. Thus, we
represent each vertical process in 2D as a circle centered on
the mean position of the neuron with a proﬁle area given by
the mean cross-sectional area of the neuron. Neurons having
several vertical branches, such as medulla cell T1 (Figure S1H),
and amacrine cell branch l (Aml) ( Figure S1C), are represented
in 2D using a circle for each branch, six for T1 and three for
Aml. This makes a total of 38 neuronal elements represented
4Present address: Raytheon BBN Technologies, Cambridge, MA 02138,
USA
5Present address: Toros University, 33140 Mersin, Turkey
*Correspondence: mitya@janelia.hhmi.org (D.B.C.), gonzalo.polavieja@
cajal.csic.es (G.G.d.P.)
i An update to this article is included at the end
in 2D as circles of different sizes. Although some of these
elements correspond to neurons that derive from and thus
‘‘belong’’ to another cartridge, these neurons all enter through
the proximal base of the cartridge and so do not affect neu-
ronal placement in 2D.
We next used this two-dimensional version of the actual
data to test whether it corresponds to a conﬁguration with
a low total length of lateral connecting branches (see wiring
cost in equation 1 of Supplemental Experimental Procedures).
We kept the same set of neuron positions (the centers of the
circles in 2D) ﬁxed but permuted the neurons to produce
random conﬁgurations. We found that the experimental con-
ﬁguration had wiring costs lower than one million random
conﬁgurations, and by extrapolating the distribution of wiring
costs of the random conﬁgurations, we obtained p < 10
27
(Figure S3A).
As a second approach to test for wiring economy of the
lamina microcircuit, we minimized wiring cost while varying
neuron locations (the centers of the circles in 2D) and
compared optimal conﬁgurations with the one observed ex-
perimentally. As wiring economy alone would only produce
the trivial solution in which all neurons overlap each other,
we also included volume exclusion ( Figure 3 A; see equation
2i n Supplemental Experimental Procedures and Table S3
and Table S4 for connectivity and neuronal radii and neuron
positions, respectively). For short distances (less than the
sum of the radii of the two neurons), the cost consisted of
a soft repulsion term modeling volume exclusion by neurons.
For larger distances, the cost is due to the wiring length of
lateral connecting branches. This was modeled as propor-
tional to the distance between the two neurons and with slope
Figure 1. A Lamina Cartridge in Drosophila melanogaster Reconstructed in
Three Dimensions from Serial Electron Microscopy Images
(A) Single electron microscopy (EM) image in which the cell proﬁles have
been segmented and digitally labeled with different colors.
(B) Three-dimensional shapes of the neurons in the reconstructed cartridge;
see Figure S1 for shapes of individual neurons.
(C) Schematic version of (B). Neurons connect with lateral branches, here
illustrated for neuron C2. The following abbreviations are used: R1–R6,
photoreceptors terminals 1 to 6; L1–L5, lamina monopolar cells 1 to 5;
L4+x and L4 2y, incoming L4 collaterals from the two neighboring anterior
cartridges along the +x and 2y axes, respectively; Am, amacrine cells;
T1, T medulla neuron 1; C2 and C3, centrifugal medulla neurons C2
and C3; Lawf, lamina wide-ﬁeld cells; ep. Glia, epithelial glia; s. glia, satellite
glia; m. glia, marginal glia. To enable their visualization, we show only four
of the six photoreceptors, ﬁve of the six T1 branches, ﬁve of the six amacrine
vertical branches, and two of the 11 Lawf branches.
A
B
D
EF
C
Figure 2. Connectivity in the Lamina Cartridge
(A) Connectivity matrix; see Table S1 for an extended matrix including
neuronal subtypes and Table S2 for a numerical version. Hotter colors
indicate a larger number of synapses.
(B–F) Representation of neurons and connecting neighbors for a photo-
receptor (B), an amacrine neuron (C), centrifugal neurons C2 and C3
(D), a large wide-ﬁeld neuron Lawf (E), and large monopolar cell L2 (F).
Wiring Economy in the Drosophila Brain
2001
given by the number of synaptic connections between them.
Because we had 38 neuronal elements, the total cost was
a sum of 703 pairwise cost functions like the one shown in Fig-
ure 3A, each using the actual connections and the actual radii
of the two corresponding neurons.
To ﬁnd low-cost conﬁgurations for the 38 neuronal ele-
ments, we resorted to a heuristic method known as simulated
annealing (SA) [ 15], which is designed for solutions to avoid
trivial local minima of high cost. We ﬁrst used SA to test
whether the actual conﬁguration is close to a minimum of the
cost function. For this, we used the actual location of neurons
in the lamina as the initial condition for SA calculations and
found the conﬁguration in Figure 3B as the one with the lowest
cost. The centers of the circles in Figure 3 B are at the com-
puted positions, and their proﬁle areas are drawn to the actual
areas. For comparison with the actual system, we plotted
white bars connecting each computed neuron location to the
actual location (Figure 3 B, black square). The mean distance
between the computed and actual neuron is 0.56 mm, relatively
small compared with the value of 1.9 6 0.1 mm of randomized
conﬁgurations obtained by permuting the neurons. Also, we
note that the computed conﬁguration is nontrivial because
neurons not only connect to close neighbors but also to distant
neurons, as illustrated in Figure 3C for neuron C2.
To understand the signiﬁcance of the computed conﬁgura-
tion in Figure 3 B, we performed several control calculations.
First we checked that this conﬁguration is at least at a local
minimum of the cost by showing that small deviations of any
neuron increased the cost ( Figure S3 B). We also checked
that the result does not depend on the functional form of the
‘‘soft repulsion’’ term of the cost ( Figure S3C).
Having established that the actual conﬁguration is close
to a minimum of the cost function, we note that SA cannot
guarantee converging to the global minimum in practice.
Therefore, we needed to determine whether this minimum
was special in its value of cost. First, we compared the cost
of this minimum with the cost of one million conﬁgurations
obtained by randomly exchanging large (small) neurons with
large (small) ones to avoid repulsion costs that were too large
(Figure 3D, dark gray histogram). None of the randomized con-
ﬁgurations had a lower cost, and by extrapolating a ﬁt to the
histogram of costs for these random conﬁgurations, we found
that p < 10
216. More importantly, we tested whether the local
minimum found is also in a conﬁguration of cost lower than
other minima of the surface cost and not only compared to
random conﬁgurations. For this test, we ran 240 SA simula-
tions with initial conﬁgurations chosen randomly and found
that they all converged upon conﬁgurations having larger
costs and that were further away from the actual experimental
conﬁguration, and by extrapolation we found a large sig-
niﬁcance of p < 10
25 (Figure 3D, white histogram). The actual
conﬁguration of neurons in a lamina cartridge is thus close to
a minimum cost conﬁguration that is signiﬁcantly lower in its
cost compared with the rest of cost surface and other minima.
In addition to the foregoing tests, we checked that the devi-
ations from the minimum-cost placement follow the structure
predicted to exist in wiring economy solutions in the presence
of other unknown factors [ 3]( Figures S3D and S3E).
Connectivity and Size as Opposing Forces in the Lamina
Our modeling approach included two types of observational
data: the actual connectivity matrix and the sizes of the neu-
rons. To better understand the role these two factors play in
the low cost conﬁguration, we manipulated them indepen-
dently (Figure 4A). First, we manipulated the radii of the proﬁles
representing axons ( Figure 4 A, green line). Errors increased
when forcing all radii to be equal to the mean proﬁle area
(‘‘homogeneous case’’) or when assigning large radii to neu-
rons that in reality had small radii, and vice versa (‘‘inverted
case’’). The concerted effect of wiring economy and volume
exclusion pushes neurons with the largest proﬁle areas
to the periphery of the cartridge, so as to prevent their
A
B
C D
Figure 3. Wiring Economy in 2D
(A) Pairwise cost between two neurons used to model soft volume exclusion
for short distances and wiring length cost for distances larger than the sum
of the radii of the two proﬁles of partner neurons. r
i is the radius of the
i neuron.
(B) Conﬁguration of the lowest cost found by simulated annealing (SA) when
the initial conﬁguration is the actual one. White lines connect to actual posi-
tions marked by black squares.
(C) The conﬁguration computed in (B) is nontrivial because it includes both
connections to close and distant neurons, illustrated for neuron C2.
(D) The actual cost of the computed conﬁguration in (B) (arrow) is sig-
niﬁcantly lower than random conﬁgurations obtained by permuting large
neuron proﬁles with other large neuron proﬁles, or small proﬁles with small
(dark gray histogram), and 240 other converged conﬁgurations found by SA
using random initial conﬁgurations (white histogram).
Current Biology Vol 21 No 23
2002
obstructing the paths of neurites extending between connect-
ing neurons.
We also tested the importance of the connectivity matrix
(Figure 4 A, blue line). We modiﬁed the number of synapses
connecting pairs of neurons, leaving the topology of connec-
tions intact. In the original conﬁguration, we used the real
numbers, in which there are more synapses from all R1–R6
photoreceptors to L1 and L2 than smaller neurons have
between any two neuron partners. This difference implies,
together with wiring economy, that L1 and L2 should be close
to all the photoreceptor terminals, in the only arrangement
possible, at the center of the cartridge. This tendency is
reduced when we make all the numbers of synapses between
neurons equal in the homogeneous case or when assigning
fewer synapses from photoreceptor terminals to L1 and L2
than those between the neurons with smaller axons in the
inverted case.
Synapse number and neuron size thus play opposing roles
in the wiring economy of the lamina cartridge. The actual
values of synapses observed (with most from the photore-
ceptor terminals to L1 and L2) imply that the neurons with
smaller axons should be located preferentially around the
periphery of the cartridge because wiring economy dictates
that L1 and L2 should occupy the cartridge axis. The real sizes
and the concerted effects of wiring economy and volume
exclusion require, by contrast, the neurons with larger axons
to occupy peripheral positions. The actual arrangement ob-
served is the result of a balance between these two opposing
effects.
Models with Simpliﬁed Connectivities
The eight neurons with the largest caliber axons (six photore-
ceptor terminals R1–R6, L1 and L2) stand out as forming the
largest number of synapses ( Figure 2 A). Including only L1 or
L2 and the photoreceptor terminals, the minimum cost conﬁg-
uration has a hexagonal shape (model I, Figure 4B), one that is
distorted when including both L1 and L2 (model II, Figure 4B).
The neurons with smaller caliber axons have a more complex
structure in the experimental connectivity matrix that we
modeled in a very simple way by a random matrix having a
mean connectivity as in the actual system (four synapses for
connecting neurons and a probability of connection of 0.2),
whereas photoreceptor terminals to L1 and L2 each have 42
synapses. Wiring length minimization with volume exclusion
for the six photoreceptors and the small neurons (without L1
and L2) predict the structure in model III of Figure 4B, with all
large objects around the periphery of the cartridge cross-
section. Including all neurons, the minimum cost conﬁguration
we found is shown in model IV of Figure 4 B. In this case, the
axons of L1 and L2, which make many connections with the
six photoreceptor terminals, lie at the center of the cartridge,
along its axis, because other conﬁgurations would have larger
values of total wiring length. This conﬁguration captures some
of the basic features of the biological system, even though no
one-to-one correspondence between the axon locations of
modeled and real neurons is seen for the neurons with small
caliber axons due to differences in the simpliﬁed connectivity
matrix.
Wiring Economy in 3D
In the real lamina, the 2D network connectivity changes with the
depth of the lamina, down the length of the cartridge, mainly
because some neurons such as C2 or L4 are synaptic only
at certain depths. In principle, one can build a 3D model with
each neuron represented as a collection of n connected vol-
umes, making the number of elements in the cartridge 38 n.
To make computations practicable, we used n = 3, a number
that captures the main changes in 2D connectivity down the
depth of the cartridge. The model thus used an overall con-
nectivity consisting of 2D layers linked by common neurons
(Table S5 ), the axon sizes of neurons in the three layers
(Table S6). The 3D model also included a cost in the z direction
to take into account the rigidity of neurons ( Supplemental
Experimental Procedures). SA found the wiring economy con-
ﬁguration in Figure 5, plotted separately for distal ( Figure 5A),
central ( Figure 5 B), and proximal depths ( Figure 5 C). Wiring
economy and volume exclusion can thus explain closely the
3D structure with low errors (0.5, 0.22, and 0.23 mm
for distal,
central, and proximal conﬁgurations, respectively).
Discussion
We have found that a lamina cartridge in the ﬂy’s brain, a
microcircuit of 38 neuronal elements that repeats 800 times,
can be explained in detail by the principles of wiring economy
[1–4, 16–25 ] and volume exclusion. The model used several
simplifying assumptions. First, wiring cost was proportional
A
B
Homogeneous
Figure 4. Roles of Connectivity and Axon Sizes
(A) Error of six wiring economy conﬁgurations with respect to the experi-
mental conﬁguration. The green line includes two manipulations of neuronal
radii, one forcing all neurons to have the same size (homogeneous case) and
another one in which the larger neurons are modeled as the smaller ones
and vice versa (the inverted case). The blue line includes two manipulations
of the connectivity matrix, one making all connecting neurons use the same
number of synapses (homogeneous case) and the other one in which neuron
pairs with the largest number of synapses are modeled as the ones with the
smaller numbers (inverted case).
(B) Wiring economy in simpliﬁed models. Model I shows wiring economy
conﬁguration in a simpliﬁed model in which the dark blue neurons (photore-
ceptor terminals) are connected only to one light blue one (L1 or L2). Model II
shows wiring economy conﬁguration including now both L1 and L2 neurons.
Model III shows wiring economy conﬁguration with photoreceptor terminals
and 30 smaller neurons having a random connectivity matrix. Model IV
shows same as model III but including neurons L1 and L2.
Wiring Economy in the Drosophila Brain
2003
to the number of synapses between two given neurons. In
effect this assumes that there is the same number of synapses
per wire for each neuron. However, we expect only minor im-
provements when adding different values for each neuron
because even a binary connectivity matrix explains the
structure well (Figure 4 A, homogeneous case on blue line).
This agreement shows that wiring economy, given the actual
network topology and the neurons’ axon calibers, are the
main determinants of cartridge structure. A second simplifying
assumption was to model volume exclusion as a repulsive
potential. An explicit consideration of neuronal deformations
would dramatically increase the space available for possible
conﬁgurations and would make the problem computationally
intractable. Furthermore, our wiring cost function assumes
that wires follow straight lines connecting partner neurons.
Again, considering more realistic tortuous paths would dra-
matically increase the complexity of computations required.
This modeling approach to include both wiring cost and
volume and its assumptions should be of value to many dif-
ferent neuronal systems. Finally, we did not take into account
gap junctions because these are not clearly visible in our EM
images and have not been annotated. Interestingly, gap junc-
tions are known to exist between neighboring photoreceptor
terminals [ 26] and have recently been reported, although not
localized, between neurons L1 and L2 [ 27]. In our model’s
optimal placement, the axons of these two cells are already
abut each other, meaning that the inclusion of gap junctions
between them is not going to affect the wiring economy
solution.
A complete circuit diagram with the level of detail and accu-
racy like the one presented here should also allow for more
detailed developmental, functional, and behavioral studies.
The circuit diagram should allow for a better targeting of
neurons for circuit manipulation to test functional principles
[9–13], as well as to constrain theoretical models. Further, it
should allow for more detailed tests of other basic principles
like information transfer and energy optimization [ 6, 28–31 ].
In particular, wide variation of cross-sectional areas among
different neurons could help address these relationships [ 32].
The wiring diagram should also allow testing for whether basic
principles like wiring economy are embedded in develop-
mental programs or emerge as a result of natural selection of
the adult brains. Speciﬁcally, experimental manipulations of
the connectivity, together with EM reconstructions and the
analysis presented here, should help determine whether pro-
cesses in development [ 33] automatically allow for a match
between connectivity and wiring economy.
Experimental Procedures
All images are from the same transmission electron microscopy series of the
dorsal side of the left eye from a 9-day-old female Oregon R Drosophila
melanogaster. After imaging, we applied a semiautomatic reconstruction
protocol developed at Janelia Farm Research Campus [ 5] to those images
containing our cartridge of interest. The synapses were manually annotated
after the reconstruction using the software Raveler (D. Olbris, P. Winston,
and D.B. Chklovskii). Three criteria were required to validate the presence
of a synapse: the existence of a T-bar ribbon in the presynaptic terminal,
the existence of surrounding vesicles in the presynaptic terminal, and the
clear apposition of postsynaptic proﬁles, either dendrites or axons. The
cost function used for modeling included a term for wiring length cost
and a repulsion term for volume exclusion, and conﬁgurations of minimum
cost were found by SA.
See Supplemental Experimental Procedures for details of all procedures.
Supplemental Information
Supplemental Information includes three ﬁgures, six tables, and Supple-
mental Experimental Procedures and can be found with this article online
at doi:10.1016/j.cub.2011.10.022.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Richard Fetter for assistance in EM imaging and Janelia
FlyEM Project Team and Aljoshcha Nern for helpful comparisons with
images from Gal4-driven expression of green ﬂuorescent protein in lamina
cells. M.R.-A. acknowledges a Formacio ´ n del Personal de Investigacio ´ n
(FPI) fellowship from Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovacio ´ n (MICINN) and
support from the Janelia Farm Research Campus (JFRC) (Howard Hughes
Medical Institute [HHMI]) visitor program; G.G.d.P. acknowledges funding
by MICINN (Spain) as Plan Nacional, including a FPI fellowship, and as part-
ners of the ERASysBio+ initiative supported under the EU ERA-NET Plus
scheme in FP7, and support from the JFRC (HHMI) visitor program. I.A.M.
also acknowledges support from the JFRC (HHMI) visitor program.
Received: September 9, 2011
Revised: October 11, 2011
Accepted: October 17, 2011
Published online: November 23, 2011
References
1. Chen, B.L., Hall, D.H., and Chklovskii, D.B. (2006). Wiring optimization
can relate neuronal structure and function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
103, 4723–4728.
2. Pe´ rez-Escudero, A., and de Polavieja, G.G. (2007). Optimally wired
subnetwork determines neuroanatomy of Caenorhabditis elegans.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 17180–17185.
3. Pe´ rez-Escudero, A., Rivera-Alba, M., and de Polavieja, G.G. (2009).
Structure of deviations from optimality in biological systems. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 20544–20549.
4. Klyachko, V.A., and Stevens, C.F. (2003). Connectivity optimization and
the positioning of cortical areas. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 7937–
7941.
5. Laughlin, S.L. (1981). A simple coding procedure enhances a neuron’s
information capacity. Z. Naturforsch., C, Biosci. 36, 910–912.
6. Meinertzhagen, I.A., and O’Neil, S.D. (1991). Synaptic organization of
columnar elements in the lamina of the wild type in Drosophila mela-
nogaster. J. Comp. Neurol. 305, 232–263.
7. Meinertzhagen, I.A., and Sorra, K.E. (2001). Synaptic organization in the
ﬂy’s optic lamina: few cells, many synapses and divergent microcircuits.
Prog. Brain Res. 131, 53–69.
8. Takemura, S.Y., Lu, Z., and Meinertzhagen, I.A. (2008). Synaptic circuits
of the Drosophila optic lobe: the input terminals to the medulla. J. Comp.
Neurol. 509, 493–513.
9. Zhu, Y., Nern, A., Zipursky, S.L., and Frye, M.A. (2009). Peripheral visual
circuits functionally segregate motion and phototaxis behaviors in the
ﬂy. Curr. Biol. 19, 613–619.
10. Zheng, L., de Polavieja, G.G., Wolfram, V., Asyali, M.H., Hardie, R.C., and
Juusola, M. (2006). Feedback network controls photoreceptor output at
the layer of ﬁrst visual synapses in Drosophila. J. Gen. Physiol. 127,
495–510.
AB C
Figure 5. Wiring Economy in 3D
From a wiring economy computation in 3D, conﬁgurations in distal (A),
central (B), and proximal (C) regions of the cartridge. The neurons are placed
in their computed positions with the experimental areas. Lines connect the
computed to the observed positions.
Current Biology Vol 21 No 23
2004
11. Rister, J., Pauls, D., Schnell, B., Ting, C.Y., Lee, C.H., Sinakevitch, I.,
Morante, J., Strausfeld, N.J., Ito, K., and Heisenberg, M. (2007).
Dissection of the peripheral motion channel in the visual system of
Drosophila melanogaster . Neuron 56, 155–170.
12. Eichner, H., Joesch, M., Schnell, B., Reiff, D.F., and Borst, A. (2011).
Internal structure of the ﬂy elementary motion detector. Neuron 70,
1155–1164.
13. Clark, D.A., Bursztyn, L., Horowitz, M.A., Schnitzer, M.J., and Clandinin,
T.R. (2011). Deﬁning the computational structure of the motion detector
in Drosophila. Neuron 70, 1165–1177.
14. Chklovskii, D.B., Vitaladevuni, S., and Scheffer, L.K. (2010). Semi-
automated reconstruction of neural circuits using electron microscopy.
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 20, 667–675.
15. Kirkpatrick, S., Gelatt, C.D.J., Jr., and Vecchi, M.P. (1983). Optimization
by simulated annealing. Science 220, 671–680.
16. Ramo´ n y Cajal, S. (1899). Textura del Sistema Nervioso del Hombre y los
Vertebrados (Texture of the Nervous System of Man and Vertebrates)
(New York: Springer-Verlag).
17. Mitchison, G. (1991). Neuronal branching patterns and the economy of
cortical wiring. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 245, 151–158.
18. Cherniak, C. (1992). Local optimization of neuron arbors. Biol. Cybern.
66, 503–510.
19. Chklovskii, D.B., Schikorski, T., and Stevens, C.F. (2002). Wiring optimi-
zation in cortical circuits. Neuron 34, 341–347.
20. Cherniak, C., Mokhtarzada, Z., Rodriguez-Esteban, R., and Changizi, K.
(2004). Connectivity optimization and the position of cortical areas.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 1081–1086.
21. Buzsa´ ki, G., Geisler, C., Henze, D.A., and Wang, X.J. (2004). Interneuron
Diversity series: Circuit complexity and axon wiring economy of cortical
interneurons. Trends Neurosci. 27, 186–193.
22. Chklovskii, D.B. (2004). Synaptic connectivity and neuronal mor-
phology: two sides of the same coin. Neuron 43, 609–617.
23. Chklovskii, D.B. (2004). Exact solution for the optimal neuronal layout
problem. Neural Comput. 16, 2067–2078.
24. Chklovskii, D.B., and Koulakov, A.A. (2004). Maps in the brain: what can
we learn from them? Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 27, 369–392.
25. Cuntz, H., Forstner, F., Borst, A., and Ha ¨ usser, M. (2010). One rule to
grow them all: a general theory of neuronal branching and its practical
application. PLoS Comput. Biol. 6, e1000877.
26. Ribi, W.A. (1978). Gap junctions coupling photoreceptor axons in the
ﬁrst optic ganglion of the ﬂy. Cell Tissue Res. 195, 299–308.
27. Joesch, M., Schnell, B., Raghu, S.V., Reiff, D.F., and Borst, A. (2010). ON
and OFF pathways in Drosophila motion vision. Nature 468, 300–304.
28. Balasubramanian, V., Kimber, D., and Berry, M.J., 2nd. (2001).
Metabolically efﬁcient information processing. Neural Comput. 13,
799–815.
29. de Polavieja, G.G. (2002). Errors drive the evolution of biological signal-
ling to costly codes. J. Theor. Biol. 214, 657–664.
30. Balasubramanian, V., and Berry, M.J., 2nd. (2002). A test of metaboli-
cally efﬁcient coding in the retina. Network 13, 531–552.
31. Niven, J.E., Anderson, J.C., and Laughlin, S.B. (2007). Fly photorecep-
tors demonstrate energy-information trade-offs in neural coding.
PLoS Biol. 5, e116.
32. Perge, J.A., Koch, K., Miller, R., Sterling, P., and Balasubramanian, V.
(2009). How the optic nerve allocates space, energy capacity, and
information. J. Neurosci. 29, 7917–7928.
33. Prakash, S., Caldwell, J.C., Eberl, D.F., and Clandinin, T.R. (2005).
Drosophila N-cadherin
 mediates an attractive interaction between
photoreceptor axons and their targets. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 443–450.
Wiring Economy in the Drosophila Brain
2005
Update
Current Biology
Volume 22, Issue 2, 24 January 2012, Page 172
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2011.12.055DOI:
Wiring Economy and Volume Exclusion
Determine Neuronal Placement
in the Drosophila Brain
Marta Rivera-Alba, Shiv N. Vitaladevuni, Yuriy Mishchenko, Zhiyuan Lu, Shin-ya Takemura, Lou Scheffer,
Ian A. Meinertzhagen, Dmitri B. Chklovskii, * and Gonzalo G. de Polavieja *
(Current Biology 21, 2000–2005; December 6, 2011)
As a result of an author oversight in the originally published version of this article, the surname of author Yuriy Mishchenko was
misspelled as ‘‘Mischenko.’’ This error has now been corrected in the article online. The authors apologize for the error and any
inconvenience that may have resulted.
*Correspondence: mitya@janelia.hhmi.org (D.B.C.), gonzalo.polavieja@cajal.csic.es (G.G.d.P.)
DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.12.055
Current Biology Vol 22 No 2
172