 Neuronal “parts list” and wiring diagram for a visual 
 system 
 Arie Matsliah  1  *, Szi-chieh Yu  1  *, Krzysztof Kruk  3  ,  Doug Bland  1  , Austin Burke  1  , Jay Gager  1  , 
 James Hebditch  1  , Ben Silverman  1  , Kyle Willie  1  , Ryan  Willie  1  , Marissa Sorek  1  , Amy R. 
 Sterling  1  , Emil Kind  4  , Dustin Garner  5  , Gizem Sancer  4  ,  Mathias F. Wernet  4  , Sung Soo 
 Kim  5  , Mala Murthy  1  , H. Sebastian Seung  1,2  , and the  FlyWire Consortium  + 
 1  Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, USA 
 2  Computer Science Department, Princeton University,  USA 
 3  ul. Grunwaldzka 22/91, 25-736, Kielce, Poland 
 4  Institut für Biologie - Neurobiologie, Freie Universität  Berlin, Germany 
 5  Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Univ.  California Santa Barbara, USA 
 *These authors contributed equally. 
 +  A list of contributing Consortium authors appears  at the end of the paper 
 A catalog of neuronal cell types has often been called a “parts list” of the brain, and 
 regarded as a prerequisite for understanding brain function. In the optic lobe of 
 
Drosophila  , rules of connectivity between cell types  have already proven essential for 
 understanding fly vision. Here we analyze the fly connectome to complete the list of cell 
 
types intrinsic to the optic lobe, as well as the rules governing their connectivity. We 
 
more than double the list of known types. Most new cell types contain between 10 and 
 
100 cells, and integrate information over medium distances in the visual field. Some 
 
existing type families (Tm, Li, and LPi) at least double in number of types. We introduce 
 
a new Sm interneuron family, which contains more types than any other, and three new 
 
families of cross-neuropil types. Self-consistency of cell types is demonstrated through 
 
automatic assignment of cells to types by distance in high-dimensional feature space, 
 
and further validation is provided by algorithms that select small subsets of 
 
discriminative features. Cell types with similar connectivity patterns divide into clusters 
 
that are interpretable in terms of motion, object, and color vision. Our work showcases 
 
the advantages of connectomic cell typing: complete and unbiased sampling, a rich 
 
array of features based on connectivity, and reduction of the connectome to a drastically 
 
simpler wiring diagram of cell types, with immediate relevance for brain function and 
 
development. 
 Introduction 
 Some of the greatest scientific discoveries of the 20th century concern the neural basis of sensory 
 perception. Hubel and Wiesel’s discovery of simple and complex cells in the visual cortex not only 
 
entered neuroscience textbooks. The hypothetical neuronal wiring diagrams in their 1962 paper  (Hubel 
 and Wiesel 1962)  inspired convolutional nets  (Fukushima  1980; Y. LeCun et al. 1989)  , which eventually 
 ignited the deep learning revolution in artificial intelligence  (Yann LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015)  .  It 
.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 15, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.10.12.562119doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 may come as a surprise that no one has ever directly mapped wiring diagrams, however influential they 
 may be. The best existing evidence requires the indirect inference of connectivity from 
 
cross-correlations in neural activity  (Reid and Alonso  1995; Alonso and Martinez 1998)  , or the 
 assumption that adjacency implies connectivity  (Chapman,  Zahs, and Stryker 1991)  . 
 Mapping the connections between individual neurons is still highly challenging in mammalian brains. 
 
Progress is being made by coupling calcium imaging  in vivo  with synaptic physiology in brain slices 
 (Cossell et al. 2015)  and calcium imaging of dendritic  spines  in vivo  (Jia et al. 2010; Wilson et al. 2016)  . 
 The reconstruction of a column of visual cortex from electron microscopic images is also becoming 
 feasible  (MICrONS Consortium et al. 2021; Schneider-Mizell  et al. 2023)  . These are tiny slivers of 
 visual systems; scaling up these approaches to tackle the full complexity of mammalian vision is still 
 aspirational. 
 To imagine the future of mammalian visual neuroscience, it is helpful to extrapolate from a brain of 
 more modest size, that of the fly, for which a complete neuronal wiring diagram is now just a few 
 keystrokes away. Especially over the past 15 years, visual neural circuits have been intensively 
 investigated in  Drosophila  (Currier, Pang, and Clandinin  2023)  with great progress in understanding the 
 perception of motion  (Shinomiya et al. 2022; Borst  and Groschner 2023)  , color  (Schnaitmann, Pagni, 
 and Reiff 2020)  , and objects  (Wu et al. 2016)  , as  well as the role of vision in complex behaviors like 
 courtship  (Ribeiro et al. 2018)  . The recent release  of a neuronal wiring diagram of a  Drosophila  brain 
 (Zheng et al. 2018; Dorkenwald, Matsliah, et al. 2023; Schlegel et al. 2023)  poses an unprecedented 
 opportunity. The first wiring diagram for a whole brain contains as a corollary the first wiring diagram for 
 an entire visual system, as well as all the wiring connecting the visual system with the rest of the brain. 
 Most visual neurons, and more generally most neurons, are situated in the optic lobes of the  Drosophila 
 brain (Fig. S1a). In the reconstructed brain  (Dorkenwald, Matsliah, et al. 2023)  , about 38,500 neurons 
 are intrinsic to the right optic lobe, meaning that their synapses are fully contained in this region. A 
 wiring diagram for the  Drosophila  visual system must include this many neurons at least. While 
 minuscule compared to a mammalian visual system, this is still too complex to comprehend or even 
 
visualize. It is essential to reduce the complexity by describing the connectivity between types of cells. 
 
For example, the roughly 800 ommatidia in the compound eye send photoreceptor axons to roughly 
 
800 L1 cells in the lamina, which in turn connect with roughly 800 Mi1 cells. That is a lot of cells and 
 
connections, but they can all be described by the simple rules that photoreceptors connect to L1, and 
 
L1 connects to Mi1. Some of these connectivity rules have long been known  (Meinertzhagen and O’Neil 
 1991; Gao et al. 2008)  , and more have been discovered over the past decade  (S.-Y. Takemura et al. 
 2013, 2015; S. Takemura et al. 2017; Shinomiya et al. 2019, 2022)  , but this knowledge is fragmentary 
 and incomplete. 
 In the present work, we exhaustively enumerate all cell types intrinsic to the optic lobe, and find all rules 
 of connection between them. We have effectively collapsed 38,500 intrinsic neurons onto just 226 
 
types, a more than 150× reduction. The wiring diagram is reduced from a 38,500×38,500 matrix to a 
 
226x226 matrix, an even huger compression. We additionally provide rules of connectivity between 
 
intrinsic types and types of boundary neurons, defined as those that connect the optic lobe with regions 
 
in the central brain. Such central brain regions are generally multimodal and/or sensorimotor, mixing 
 
information coming from the eyes and other sense organs, so we regard the optic lobe proper as the 
 
fly’s visual system. 
.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 15, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.10.12.562119doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 In our connectomic approach, a cell type is defined as a set of cells with similar patterns of connectivity 
 (Scheffer et al. 2020)  , and this definition turns out to be critical for distinguishing between cell types that 
 are morphologically very similar. Because connectivity is so closely related to function, cells of the 
 same connectomic type are expected to share the same function  (H. Sebastian Seung and Sümbül 
 2014)  . By the same logic, cell types with similar  patterns of connectivity ought to have similar functions. 
 We support this claim by dividing our cell types into clusters, and interpreting the functions of these 
 clusters in terms of motion, object, and color vision. This provides preliminary clues concerning the 
 
functions of newly discovered cell types, as well as the previously known cell types for which functional 
 
information has been lacking. 
 The present work is based on version 783 of the FlyWire connectome, which incorporates proofreading 
 up to September 30, 2023. Our work will continue to be updated as new versions of the connectome 
 
are released (see Discussion). All information can be browsed, searched, and downloaded at the 
 
FlyWire Codex (codex.flywire.ai). This addition to the existing array of FlyWire resources  (Dorkenwald, 
 Matsliah, et al. 2023; Schlegel et al. 2023)  will  accelerate the pace of discovery for many researchers. 
 Class, Family, and Type 
 Neurons intrinsic to the optic lobe are those with synapses entirely contained inside the optic lobe, and 
 are the main topic of this study (Fig. S1a). In addition, there are “boundary” neurons that straddle the 
 
optic lobe and the rest of the brain (Fig. S1b). Boundary neurons fall into several classes. Visual 
 
projection neurons (VPNs) have dendrites in the optic lobe and extend axons to the central brain. 
 Visual centrifugal neurons (VCNs) do the opposite. Heterolateral neurons are intrinsic to the pair of 
 optic lobes; they extend from one optic lobe to the other while making few or no synapses in the central 
 
brain. Boundary neurons have been divided into types by  (Schlegel et al. 2023)  . 
 Our work is based on the brain of a single  Drosophila  adult female, which was reconstructed by the 
 FlyWire Consortium  (Dorkenwald, Matsliah, et al. 2023)  .  We have proofread roughly 38,500 intrinsic 
 neurons in the right optic lobe, as well as 4,000 VPNs, 250 VCNs, 200 heterolateral neurons, and 4700 
 
photoreceptor cells. 80% of the synapses of intrinsic neurons are with other intrinsic neurons, and 20% 
 
are with boundary neurons. These statistics suggest that the optic lobe communicates more with itself 
 
than with the rest of the brain. 
 We divide optic lobe intrinsic neurons into four broad classes. Cells of the columnar class (Fig. 1a) have 
 axons oriented parallel to the main axis of the visual columns (see Methods for definition of “axon”). 
 
Following  (Fischbach and Dittrich 1989)  , the arbor  of a columnar neuron is allowed to be wider than a 
 single column; what matters is the orientation of the axon, not the aspect ratio of the arbor. 
 
Photoreceptor or retinula cells are columnar but are not intrinsic to the optic lobe, strictly speaking, 
 
because they enter from the retina. Nevertheless, they will sometimes be included with intrinsic types in 
 
the analyses and comparisons to follow. 
 The optic lobe (Fig. S1a, b) contains four main neuropils (lamina, medulla, lobula, and lobula plate) and 
 a smaller fifth neuropil (accessory medulla). Following  (Fischbach and Dittrich 1989)  we further 
 distinguish between distal and proximal medulla, regarding them as two separate neuropils (Fig. S1c). 
 
A columnar cell spans multiple neuropils (Fig. 1a). Cells of the local interneuron class (Fig. 1b) are 
 
defined as being confined to a single neuropil. We also define two classes that cross multiple neuropils 
 
but are not columnar. A cross-neuropil tangential cell (Fig. 1c) has an axon that is oriented 
.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 15, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.10.12.562119doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 perpendicular to the main axis of the visual columns as it runs inside a neuropil. A cross-neuropil 
 amacrine cell (Fig. 1c) lacks an axon. Interneurons are typically amacrine, but sometimes have an axon 
 
in the tangential orientation. 
 Each class is divided into multiple families. A family is defined as a set of cells that share the same 
 neuropils (Fig. 1a, b, c, Methods). For example, the Tm family projects from the distal medulla to the 
 
lobula, while the TmY family projects from the distal medulla to both the lobula and lobula plate (Fig. 
 
1a). (Tm and TmY also typically receive inputs in the proximal medulla.) 
 Each family is divided into cell types. All 226 intrinsic types as well as photoreceptor types are available 
 for 3D interactive viewing at the FlyWire Codex (codex.flywire.ai). Table S1 is a master list of all types 
 
and their properties. Data S1 contains one “card” for each type, which includes its discriminative logical 
 
predicate (see below), basic statistics, diagram in the style of  (Fischbach and Dittrich 1989)  showing 
 stratification and other single-cell anatomy, and 3D renderings of all the cells in the type. 
 Most neurons in the optic lobe are columnar (Fig. 1e, right), and half of the families are columnar (Fig. 
 1e, left). Interneurons constitute just 17% of optic lobe intrinsic neurons, but the majority of cell types 
 
(Fig. 1e, middle). A columnar family (Tm) contains more cells than any other family (Fig. 1f, right). An 
 
interneuron family (Sm) contains more types than any other family (Fig. 1f, left). 
 The columnar families (Fig. 1a) were defined by  (Fischbach  and Dittrich 1989)  . The Sm interneuron 
 family is new (Fig. 1b), and some of the cross-neuropil families are wholly or almost wholly new (Fig. 
 1c). Over half of the cell types are new, and many of these are interneuron types. 
 Connectomic approach to cell types 
 For each cell, we define an output feature vector by the number of output synapses onto neurons of cell 
 type  t  , which runs from 1 to  T  . This is a  T  -dimensional  vector, where  T  is the number of cell types. The 
 output feature vector is a row of the cell-to-type connectivity matrix (Methods). For each cell, we 
 
similarly defined an input feature vector by the number of input synapses received from neurons of cell 
 
type  t  . This is a column of the type-to-cell connectivity  matrix (Methods). Alternatively, feature vectors 
 can be based on connection number, where a connection is defined as two or more synapses from one 
 
neuron to another (Methods), and this gives similar results. 
 The input and output feature vectors were concatenated to form a 2  T  -dimensional feature vector. If we 
 include only intrinsic types (Fig. 2a), then  T  is  226 and the dimensionality 2  T  is 452. If we include  both 
 intrinsic and boundary types, then  T  is over 700 and  the dimensionality 2  T  is over 1400 (not shown). 
 We experimented with both dimensionalities, and as will be explained below, the results do not depend 
 on the boundary types. The lower dimensionality feature vector with only intrinsic types is sufficient for 
 
defining types. 
 A cell type is defined as a set of cells with similar feature vectors  (Scheffer et al. 2020)  . Cells of  the 
 same type are near each other in feature space, while cells of different types are far away (Fig. 2b). 
 This was quantified using weighted Jaccard distance, which we will call Jaccard distance for short 
 
(Methods). 
.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 15, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.10.12.562119doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 In order to define feature vectors, some cell types must already exist. An initial set of cell types was 
 defined by human analysts employing traditional morphological criteria (Methods). Namely, each 
 
neuropil was divided into multiple layers  (Fischbach  and Dittrich 1989)  (Fig. S1c). A cell type was 
 classically defined as a set of neurons that stratify across the layers in the same way. Such cell types 
 
were used to compute feature vectors, and then hierarchical clustering was applied. In many cases, this 
 
led to further division into cell types that could not be distinguished by traditional criteria. In other cases, 
 
it led to grouping of morphological variants into a single type. After splitting or merging types, the 
 
feature vectors were recomputed and the process continued iteratively. 
 The final cell types are validated in several ways (Methods). We show that our clustering is 
 self-consistent, in the sense that almost all cells end up in the original cluster if we attempt to reassign 
 
each cell’s feature vector to the nearest cluster. For more interpretable evaluations, we construct 
 
compact connectivity-based discriminators that can predict cell type membership (Fig. S2, Data S2). 
 
We show that membership can be accurately predicted by a logical conjunction of on average five 
 
synaptic partner types. For each intra-neuropil type, we also provide a 2D projection of the connection 
 matrix that can be used to discriminate that type from others in the same neuropil (Fig. S3c, Data S3). 
 Hierarchical clustering of cell types 
 We defined a connectomic cell type as a set of cells with similar feature vectors based on connectivity. 
 It follows that cells of the same type should share the same function, if one accepts the maxim, 
 
“Nothing defines the function of a neuron more faithfully than the nature of its inputs and outputs” 
 (Mesulam 2005)  . 
 Taking one step further, the same maxim implies that cell types with similar feature vectors should have 
 similar visual functions. A cell type feature vector can be obtained by summing the feature vectors over 
 
all cells in that type. We separately sum and normalize the input and output feature vectors, and then 
 
concatenate the results. 
 We computed the Jaccard distance between all pairs of cell type feature vectors. It is hard to extract 
 insights directly from such a large distance matrix, so we used it to compute a hierarchical clustering 
 
(Fig. 2c). The dendrogram was cut to yield a flat clustering, which is indicated by coloring the 
 
dendrogram (Fig. 2c). Each cluster contains some cell types for which visual functions are known. Later 
 on, we will extrapolate from this information to assign hypothetical functions to entire clusters. 
 The precise memberships in the clusters warrant cautious interpretation, as the clusters are the 
 outcome of just one clustering algorithm (average linkage), and differ somewhat if another clustering 
 
algorithm is employed. Each cluster contains core groups of types that are highly similar to each other, 
 
i.e. types that merge in the dendrogram farther from the origin. These are more certain to have similar 
 
visual functions, and tend to be grouped together by any clustering algorithm. Types that are merged 
 
closer to the origin are less similar, and their cluster membership is more arbitrary. Some degree of 
 
arbitrariness is inevitable when one divides the visual system into separate subsystems, because 
 
subsystems interact with each other, and types that mediate such interactions are borderline cases. 
 Each cluster is generally a mixture of types from multiple neuropil families. Skeptics might regard such 
 mixing as arising from the “noisiness” in the clustering noted above. Indeed, the nearest types, those 
 
that merge in the dendrogram farther from the center (Fig. 2c), tend to be from the same neuropil 
.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 15, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.10.12.562119doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 family. But plenty of dendrogram merges between types of different families happen at intermediate 
 distances rather than the largest distances. Therefore some of the mixing of types from different 
 
neuropil families seems genuinely rooted in biology. 
 Type-to-type connectivity 
 We define a type-to-type connection matrix in which the  st  element is the number of synapses from cell 
 type  s  to cell type  t  (Methods). The type-to-type  matrix is drastically smaller than the cell-to-cell matrix. 
 Nevertheless, it is still quite large, presenting challenges to visualization and understanding. Figure S4 
 attempts to show the entire matrix. The area of each dot encodes the number of synapses in some 
 type-to-type connection. Dot area saturates above 3600 synapses, in order to make weaker 
 
connections visible. The numerical values of the matrix elements are provided in the Supplementary 
 Information, and can be downloaded from the Codex. 
 The type-to-type connection matrix can also be visualized as a directed graph. Since showing all 
 connections is visually overwhelming, it is important to find ways of displaying meaningful subsets of 
 
connections. One that we have found helpful is to display the top input and output connections of each 
 
type (Fig. 3, S5, S6). In such a graph, every node must have at least one outgoing and one incoming 
 
connection. But some nodes can still be “hubs” with many visible connections. For example, Mi1 is the 
 
top input to a large number of postsynaptic types. 
 The nodes of the graph were positioned in 2D space by a graph layout algorithm that tends to place 
 visibly connected types close together. It turns out that nearby nodes in the 2D graph layout space tend 
 to belong to the clusters that were extracted from the high dimensional connectivity-based feature 
 
vectors (compare node colorings of Fig. 3 with clusters of Fig. 2). 
 We can also normalize the type-to-type connection matrix to be the fraction of synapses from cell type  s 
 to cell type  t  . Depending on the normalization, this  could be the fraction of input to type  t  or fraction  of 
 output from type  s  (Methods). Input and output fractions  are shown in Data S4, and are equivalent to 
 the cell type feature vectors defined earlier. Each column of the heatmap contains the input or output 
 fractions of the corresponding cell type listed at the bottom of the heatmap. The rows include all 
 
partners that contribute at least 0.02 input or output fraction to any of the reference types listed at the 
 
bottom of the heatmap. The heatmaps include partner boundary types as well as intrinsic types. The 
 colormap has been chosen to saturate at 0.2, in order to make small values visible, so large values 
 (≥0.2) are indistinguishable. The viewer should be alert to artifacts that can arise due to normalization. 
 
If a cell type makes very few synapses overall, that can result in large input and output fractions, giving 
 
the mistaken impression of connections that are strong when they are actually weak or nonexistent. 
 Perplexity as a measure of degree of connectivity 
 As mentioned above, some cell types are hubs with a high degree of connectivity to other types. The 
 degree of a node can be defined as the number of nodes to which it is connected. The elements of the 
 
type-to-type connection matrix vary greatly in magnitude, and it is unclear whether weak connections 
 
should be included when computing degree. This can be handled by thresholding the connection matrix 
 
before computing degree. For a threshold-independent measure,  however,  we instead calculate a 
 “perplexity” for each node. The outgoing connection strengths (synapse counts) are normalized as if 
.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 15, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.10.12.562119doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 they were a probability distribution, and out-perplexity is defined as the exponential of the entropy of 
 this distribution. Out-perplexity reduces to out-degree in the special case that the distribution is uniform 
 
over the connected partners. In-perplexity is defined analogously. 
 If cell types are ranked by product of out- and in-perplexity (Fig. S7a), then TmY5a is the most 
 connected hub, and various types in the lamina and distal medulla are the least hub-like. Motion-related 
 
cell types generally do not have high perplexity. Out-perplexity tends to be greater than in-perplexity 
 
(Fig. S7a), though they are positively correlated (Fig. S7b). 
 One might expect that “early” types in visual processing would have divergent connectivity, to distribute 
 photoreceptor signals to many targets, while “late” types would have convergent connectivity, 
 
summarizing the final results of optic lobe computations for use by the central brain. This idea can be 
 
tested by ranking types according to ratio of out- to in-perplexity (Fig. S8). Indeed, the top of the list 
 
includes early types like the inner photoreceptors R7 and R8, L3 and L5, and many Dm and Pm 
 
interneuron types. And many Sm types are near the bottom of the list, as befits their extensive 
 connectivity with VPNs in the serpentine layer. But reality is clearly more complex than the simple idea 
 that motivated the graph. 
 The “numerous” cell types 
 The most numerous types contain about 800 cells, the same as the estimated number of ommatidia 
 (Fig. 1d). The least numerous types contain only a single cell. The number of cells per type is 
 multimodally distributed (Fig. 1g), with two sharp modes at 1 and roughly 700. Most of the distribution 
 lies between these modes (Fig. 1g, S1d). 
 The most numerous types have long been known  (Fischbach  and Dittrich 1989)  . It is the less numerous 
 types where our knowledge has been incomplete, and arguably they are where much of the magic of 
 vision happens. As with the photoreceptors, neural activity in the most numerous cell types like L1 and 
 
Mi1 mostly encodes information about the image at or near single points in visual space. But perception 
 
requires the integration of information from points that can be quite distant from each other, and this is 
 
done by the larger neurons that belong to the less numerous types. 
 Photoreceptor axons originating in the roughly 800 ommatidia of the compound eye project 
 retinotopically to the lamina and medulla neuropils. The medulla is divided into columns, which are 
 presumed to be in one-to-one correspondence with the ommatidia.  (S.-Y. Takemura et al. 2013)  defined 
 “modular” cell types as those that are in one-to-one correspondence with columns. Based on their 
 
reconstruction of seven medulla columns,  (S.-Y. Takemura  et al. 2015)  found that there were 20 
 modular types. These largely correspond to the cell types that contain from 720 to 800 cells in v783 
 
(Fig. 1d). 
 The top end (800) of this range is likely the true number of columns in this optic lobe. In the lower end 
 of this range, the deficit relative to 800 could be due to underrecovery of cells (Methods) so our data is 
 
still consistent with modularity. R7 and R8 are about 650 cells each, but this is not inconsistent with 
 
modularity because photoreceptors are especially challenging to proofread in this dataset (Methods). 
 
Tm21 (a.k.a. Tm6), Dm2, TmY5a, Tm27, and Mi15 have much lower numbers, so we agree with  (S.-Y. 
 Takemura et al. 2015)  that they are not modular. 
.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 15, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.10.12.562119doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 On the other hand, some of our types (T2a, Tm3, T4c, T3) contain more than 800 proofread cells (Fig. 
 1d), which violates the definition of modularity. This partially agrees with  (S.-Y. Takemura et al.  2015)  , 
 who regarded T3 and T2a as modular, and T4 and Tm3 as not modular. T4 is an unusual case, as T4c 
 is above 800 while the other T4 types are below 800, though these numbers could still creep upward 
 with further proofreading. 
 A genuine analysis of modularity requires going beyond simple cell counts, and analyzing locations in 
 order to check the idea of one-to-one correspondence. Such an analysis is left for future work. For now, 
 
we will apply the term “numerous” to those types containing 720 or more cells, as well as R7 and R8, 
 and do not commit to whether these types are truly modular. 
 (S.-Y. Takemura et al. 2015)  provide a matrix of connections  between their modular types. This shows 
 good agreement with our data (Fig. S9, Methods), and validates our reconstruction in the optic lobe. 
 This validation complements the estimates of reconstruction accuracy in the central brain that are 
 
provided in the flagship paper  (Dorkenwald, Matsliah,  et al. 2023)  . 
 The connectivity and visual responses of the numerous types are largely known from previous work. In 
 
the following, we will provide functional interpretations of the cell type clusters shown in the dendrogram 
 
of Fig. 2c. It turns out that the numerous types that belong to a single cluster have similar functions, 
 
which enables us to ascribe a function to each cluster as a whole. In other words, we extrapolate from 
 
the functions of the numerous types to yield preliminary clues regarding the functions of the less 
 
numerous types. 
 ON, OFF, and luminance channels 
 We propose that Cluster8 and Cluster9 be regarded as OFF and ON channels, respectively, which are 
 dedicated to carrying information about light decrements (“OFF” stimuli) and light increments (“ON” 
 
stimuli). Our concept is similar to the well-known ON and OFF motion pathways, but differs because our 
 
ON and OFF channels are general-purpose, feeding into the object and color subsystems as well as 
 
the motion subsystem. 
 Cluster8 contains the OFF cells L2, L4, Tm1, Tm2, and Tm4. Cluster9 contains the ON cells L1, L5, 
 Mi1, and Tm3 and also the OFF cell L1. It makes sense to assign L1 to the ON channel even though it 
 is an OFF cell, because L1 is inhibitory/glutamatergic, so its effects on downstream partners are similar 
 to those of an ON excitatory cell. (Note that information about whether synapses are excitatory or 
 
inhibitory was not used by our clustering algorithm.) Cluster9 also contains C2 and C3, which are 
 
expected to be ON cells because their top inputs are L1 and L5. 
 The ON and OFF motion pathways were traditionally defined by working backwards from the T4 and T5 
 motion detectors, which respectively compute the directions of moving ON and OFF stimuli  (Borst and 
 Groschner 2023)  . The ON motion pathway is directly  upstream from T4 and includes Mi1, Mi4, Mi9, and 
 Tm3. The OFF motion pathway is directly upstream from T5 and includes Tm1, Tm2, Tm4, and Tm9. 
 
These types are the consensus  (Currier, Pang, and  Clandinin 2023)  , though some authors include 
 further types  (Borst and Groschner 2023)  . The ON and  OFF channels defined by our clustering have 
 some overlap with the ON and OFF motion pathways, but they are not the same. 
.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International licenseavailable under a
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 15, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.10.12.562119doi: bioRxiv preprint 