Exploring the String Axiverse with Precision Black Hole Physics

Asimina Arvanitakia,b and Sergei Dubovskyc,d

a Berkeley Center for Theoretical Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 94720

b Theoretical Physics Group, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, 94720

c Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA

d Institute for Nuclear Research of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 60th October Anniversary

Prospect, 7a, 117312 Moscow, Russia

Abstract

It has recently been suggested that the presence of a plenitude of light axions, an Ax-
iverse, is evidence for the extra dimensions of string theory. We discuss the observational
consequences of these axions on astrophysical black holes through the Penrose superradiance
process. When an axion Compton wavelength is comparable to the size of a black hole, the
axion binds to the black hole “nucleus” forming a gravitational atom in the sky. The occupa-
tion number of superradiant atomic levels, fed by the energy and angular momentum of the
black hole, grows exponentially. The black hole spins down and an axion Bose-Einstein con-
densate cloud forms around it. When the attractive axion self-interactions become stronger
than the gravitational binding energy, the axion cloud collapses, a phenomenon known in
condensed matter physics as “Bosenova”. The existence of axions is ﬁrst diagnosed by gaps
in the mass vs spin plot of astrophysical black holes. For young black holes the allowed values
of spin are quantized, giving rise to ”Regge trajectories” inside the gap region. The axion
cloud can also be observed directly either through precision mapping of the near horizon
geometry or through gravitational waves coming from the Bosenova explosion, as well as
axion transitions and annihilations in the gravitational atom. Our estimates suggest that
these signals are detectable in upcoming experiments, such as Advanced LIGO, AGIS, and
LISA. Current black hole spin measurements imply an upper bound on the QCD axion de-
cay constant of 2 · 1017 GeV, while Advanced LIGO can detect signals from a QCD axion
cloud with a decay constant as low as the GUT scale. We ﬁnally discuss the possibility of
observing the γ-rays associated with the Bosenova explosion and, perhaps, the radio waves
from axion-to-photon conversion for the QCD axion.

1
1
0
2

g
u
A
6
1

]
h
t
-
p
e
h
[

2
v
8
5
5
3
.
4
0
0
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents

1 Introduction and summary

2 Spectroscopy of superradiance

2.1 Non-relativistic approximation α/l (cid:28) 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 WKB approximation α (cid:29) 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Dynamics of superradiance

3.1 Gravity wave emission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1.1 General formalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1.2 Axion transitions between levels in a black hole atom . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1.3 Axion annihilations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Axion non-linearities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Shutdown of superradiance due to level mixing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2.1 Bosenova
3.2.2

4 Observational signatures

4.1 Black hole Regge trajectories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 Gravitational waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 Direct observation of the cloud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4 The QCD axion and superradiance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4.1 Black hole spindown and Advanced LIGO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4.2 Photon signals: radio waves, γ- and X-rays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.5 Accelerated growth of black holes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 Bookkeeping of anthropic axions

6 Conclusions

7 Acknowledgements

1

Introduction and summary

2

11
13
16

19
20
21
22
23
25
26
26

31
31
35
40
41
42
43
44

47

49

50

Black holes are among the most fascinating systems in astrophysics, and the most mysterious
objects in quantum gravity and string theory, for a long time serving as principal “theoretical
laboratories” for exploring non-perturbative gravitational dynamics. The purpose of this paper is
to initiate a detailed study of the exciting possibility [1] that astrophysical black holes may serve
as actual laboratories for the discovery of new elementary particles.

There are several reasons why we believe this possibility is realistic. On a purely phenomeno-
logical side, black hole observations are routine practice in nowaday astronomy (see, e.g., [2] for
a review). About 40 stellar mass black holes in X-ray binaries in the Milky Way and neighboring
galaxies have been identiﬁed with masses in the range ∼ 5 ÷ 20M(cid:12). Supermassive black holes
with masses ∼ 105 ÷ 1010 M(cid:12) have been found in centers of many galaxies including the Milky

2

Way and believed to be hosted by nearly all of the galaxies. Also, the ﬁrst intermediate mass
(∼ 100 ÷ 105 M(cid:12)) candidates have been identiﬁed.

Following the evolution of binary systems or measuring the velocity dispersion of stars rotating
around galactic centers allows to determine black hole masses. Most crucially for what follows,
recent advances in X-ray astronomy and in numerical magnetohydrodynamical simulations of the
accreting gas in the Kerr metric open the possibility for a detailed exploration of the near-horizon
region and, as a consequence, for high precision neasurements of black hole spins [3, 4]. First
estimates for the angular momentum of several black holes have already been delivered [5], often
suggesting high values for the spin, although at the moment diﬀerent techniques sometimes give
rise to conﬂicting results [6].

In the future, apart from improvements of traditional astronomical techniques for observing
the near horizon environment and its better theoretical modeling, a unique probe of the black
hole geometry will be provided by low frequency gravitational waves observatories, such as LISA
[7] or AGIS, a gravitational wave detector based on atom interferometric techniques [8, 9]. For
the purpose of testing the near horizon geometry the most promising candidates are the so-called
extreme mass ratio inspirals—stellar mass compact objects captured by supermassive black hole
in the galactic center (see, e.g., [10]). LISA and AGIS are expected to detect about a hundred of
such events per year. Each such measurement allows not only to determine the black hole spin
and mass with an exquisite accuracy, 10−3 ÷ 10−5, depending on the details of a particular event,
but also to check whether higher order metric moments, up to 6 ÷ 7, agree with their values for
the Kerr geometry.

This ongoing observational progress indicates that we are witnessing the dawn of precision
black hole physics. Undoubtedly, black hole observations will be of great value for astrophysics,
however it is natural to inquire whether these data may be useful for beyond the Standard Model
physics as well, given that it will provide a rare test of non-linear gravity. However, possibly
contrary to naive expectation, it turns out quite challenging to ﬁnd modiﬁed gravity theories
which would predict deviations from general relativity near astrophysical black holes and would
not contradict current gravity tests. One candidate class of modiﬁed theories of gravity aﬀecting
black hole dynamics are models of Higgs phases of gravity, where black hole no-hair theorems can
be violated [11].

In this paper we explore a less exotic possibility to test fundamental physics with precision
It is related to the famous Penrose process, a mechanism to extract
black hole observations.
energy and angular momentum from rotating black holes [12, 13]. As reviewed in detail below,
this process, known as superradiance, when applied to waves rather than particles [14, 15, 16],
gives rise to a spin-down instability of a rotating black hole [17, 18, 19, 20], if a massive boson with
a Compton wavelength of order the black hole gravitational radius is present in nature. As we
will see, this instability turns rotating astrophysical black holes into sensitive detectors of bosons
with masses in the range µ ∼ 10−9 ÷ 10−21 eV. Before focusing on the observational consequences
of the superradiant instability, let us review why it is natural to expect ultra-light bosons in the
theory that transform astrophysical black holes in probes of fundamental physics.

A natural situation giving rise to a particle of a small, but non-vanishing mass is when this
particle is a (pseudo)Goldstone boson of a spontaneously broken global symmetry, which is also
explicitly broken by non-perturbative eﬀects. Probably the best motivated candidate for such

3

a particle is the QCD axion φa—a pseudoscalar particle coupled to the QCD instanton number
density via

Sθ =

(cid:90)

1
32π2fa

d4x φa(cid:15)µνλρTr GµνGλρ .

(1)

Note that at the classical level Sθ is invariant under the Peccei–Quinn (PQ) symmetry φa →
φa + const, so that the QCD axion is indeed a (pseudo)Goldstone boson with fa being the scale
of spontaneous symmetry breaking. This symmetry is explicitly broken by the QCD instanton
eﬀects that generate the axion potential giving rise to a solution for the strong CP problem—the
primary motivation for the QCD axion. As a result the QCD axion acquires a mass equal to

µa ≈ 6 · 10−10eV

(cid:19)

(cid:18)1016GeV
fa

.

(2)

The Compton wavelength of the QCD axion with a high symmetry breaking scale fa (cid:38) 1016 GeV
matches the size of stellar mass black holes and, consequently, can aﬀect their dynamics, suggesting
that this part of the parameter space for the QCD axion can be explored through black hole
observations.

There are several reasons why this conclusion is very important. First, non-gravitational
interactions of the QCD axion with the rest of the Standard Model particles are very suppressed at
these high values of fa. As a result this part of the parameter space can not be easily probed by any
other means, either laboratory or astrophysical. Second, in many “generic” string constructions,
i.e., in compactiﬁcations where the extra-dimensional manifold is neither highly anisotropic, nor
strongly warped, the values of fa are naturally around the grand uniﬁcation scale MGU T (cid:39) 2 ×
1016 GeV [21]. Finally, as elaborated in more detail in section 5, ﬁnding the QCD axion with
fa ∼ MGU T would indicate that the baryon-to-dark matter ratio varies on length scales longer
than the observed part of the Universe and its local value is determined by anthropic reasoning.
Discovery of the QCD axion in this regime would be further evidence for enviromental selection
already suggested by the cosmological constant problem, and by the string landscape.

There is an even stronger and more direct link between the QCD axion and the landscape of
string vacua, a link that gives rise to the expectation of a plenitude of light axion-like particles, an
axiverse [1] – this same link also suggests the existence of many massless vectors, whose massive
superpartners may be discovered at the LHC [22]. In string constructions, an axion usually arises
as a Kaluza–Klein (KK) zero mode of a higher-dimensional antisymmetric form ﬁeld. Such zero
modes have a purely topological origin: they are labeled by non-contractable cycles in the extra-
dimensional manifold. Non-contractable cycles allow for non-trivial gauge ﬁeld conﬁgurations with
a vanishing ﬁeld strength, the so called Wilson lines. These conﬁgurations do not carry energy
and correspond to zero KK modes at the perturbative level. They only acquire a mass due to
non-perturbative eﬀects.

Interestingly, the very same ingredients that give rise to the string axiverse, higher-dimensional
form ﬁelds and non-trivial cycles in the compactiﬁcation manifold allowing also to turn on gauge
ﬂuxes, also give rise to the string landscape of 10500 or so vacua. In order to allow for the tuning of
the cosmological constant at the ∼ 10−120 level, as required by observations, the compactiﬁcation
manifold should contain of order few hundred cycles, given that the total amount of ﬂux quanta
for a cycle is typically limited by a number around ten in order to stay in a perturbative regime.

4

Figure 1: Axionic Black Hole Atom: The spinning black hole “feeds” superradiant states form-
ing an axion Bose-Einstein condensate. The resulting bosonic atom will emit gravitons through
axion transitions between levels and annihilations and will emit axions as a consequence of self-
interactions in the axion ﬁeld.

Consequently, one may expect hundreds of axion-like particles in a given string compactiﬁcation.
However, a plenitude of cycles does not yet guarantee the presence of a plenitude of axions. There
is a number of eﬀects in string theory that could produce a large axion mass, such as branes
wrapping the cycles, and ﬂuxes. One can roughly estimate the number of light axions as being
determined by the number of cycles without ﬂuxes—presumably, around one tenth of the total
number of cycles. Still this leaves us with the expectation of several tens of axion-like particles.

The discovery of a plenitude of particles in our vacuum with similar properties but diﬀerent
masses supports the idea of a plenitude of vacua, as both the axiverse and the multiverse are
dynamical consequences of the same fundamental ingredients.

The masses of string axions are exponentially sensitive to the sizes of the corresponding cycles,
so one expects them to be homogeneously distributed on the logarithmic scale. However, given
that the QCD θ-parameter is constrained to be less than 10−10, non-perturbative string corrections
to the QCD axion potential should be at least ten orders of magnitude suppressed as compared
to the QCD generated potential.
It is then natural to expect many of the axions to be much
lighter than the QCD axion; these are the axions whose mass is dominated only by these small
non-perturbative string eﬀects.

The implicit, and very plausible assumption behind this line of reasoning is that there is no
anthropic reason for the existence and properties of the QCD axion. Consequently, these properties
should follow from the dynamics of the compactiﬁcation manifold, rather than being a result of
ﬁne-tuning, and the QCD axion should be a typical representative among other axion-like ﬁelds.
A priori we expect tens (or even hundreds) of light axions, it would be really surprising if the
QCD axion turned out to be the single one.

5

These arguments motivate us to look not only for the QCD axion, but for axions in the entire
mass range µ ∼ 10−9 ÷ 10−21 eV, where they can aﬀect stellar or galactic astrophysical black
holes through superradiance. Let us summarize now the major features of superradiance and its
principal observational consequences.

Superradiance [14, 15, 16] is the phenomenon of wave ampliﬁcation during scattering oﬀ a
rotating black hole which takes place whenever the wave frequency ω and the magnetic quantum
number m satisfy the superradiance condition

where w+ is the angular velocity of the black hole horizon deﬁned as

0 < ω < mw+ ,

w+ =

1
2rg

a/rg
1 + (cid:112)1 − (a/rg)2

(3)

(4)

with rg being the gravitational radius of the black hole and 0 < a < rg is the spin-to-mass ratio.
Superradiant ampliﬁcation may lead to an instability under certain circumstances. One example,
admittedly not a very practical one, is the “black hole bomb” by Press and Teukolsky [23, 24]: a
rotating black hole surrounded by a spherical mirror. A single photon introduced in the system, or
created by quantum ﬂuctuations, with quantum numbers satisfying the superradiance condition
(3) gives rise to an exponentially growing number of photons inside the mirror through a chain of
consequent ampliﬁcations at the black hole horizon and reﬂections from the mirror.

Remarkably, nature provides such a mirror in the presence of a massive boson [17, 18, 19, 20].
Massive bosons, in our case axions, have bound Keplerian levels in the gravitational ﬁeld of a black
hole. This allows for a black hole to release its spin by populating levels satisfying the condition
(3), see Fig. 1. This creates an axionic Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) cloud rotating around
the black hole. The process is only eﬃcient if the Compton wavelength of an axion is comparable
to the black hole size. As a result, the energy spectrum of superradiant levels is quantized and
very close to the spectrum of a hydrogen atom. The superradiant axion cloud loses its energy
and momentum by gravitational wave emission associated with axion transitions between diﬀerent
“atomic” levels, and with axion annihilations to gravitons. Another important loss mechanism is
related to non-linearities in the axion potential and results in the emission of axions. Finally, the
whole system may be fueled by energy and spin inﬂow from the matter accreting onto the black
hole.

In Fig. 2 we show the region of black hole mass and axion mass parameter space that is aﬀected
by superradiance. The dark area outlines the region where a superradiant cloud has enough time
to be built up during the lifetime of the Universe for a maximally spinning black hole. The lighter
region shows the part of the parameter space where the superradiant spindown rate is faster than
the spinup rate due to Eddington accretion, so that Eddington accreting black holes in this mass
range lose their spin as the cloud develops.

There are three major classes of observational signatures associated with the axion cloud that

we are going to discuss in the current paper:

• Gaps in the black hole “Regge plot” (spin vs mass plane)—the absence of rapidly rotating
black holes when their gravitation radius matches the Compton wavelength of an axion.

6

Figure 2: The part of the black hole and axion parameter space potentially aﬀected by super-
radiance. For axion and black hole masses in the colored region the time required to create a
substantial axion cloud is shorter than the age of the Universe. For masses in a light colored
region the superradiance rate is faster than the Eddington accretion rate.

• Direct gravitational wave signals from the rotating axion cloud. For the QCD axion this

signal falls into the sensitivity band of the Advanced LIGO interferometer.

• Modiﬁcation of the near-horizon metric due to the presence of the axion cloud.

The main goal of this paper is to evaluate the observability of these classes of signatures in
near future experiments. Detailed quantitative predictions for gravitational wave emission rates
and waveforms, as well as the change of the templates for the near horizon metric is likely to
require numerical work. The reason is that the axion BEC cloud is a rich and complicated
dynamical system with many processes that need to be taken into account in order to have an
accurate description of its behavior at cosmological time scales. One important process that poses
a challenge for an analytical treatment is the eﬀect of axion self-interactions on superradiance.
Here we limit ourself to a qualitative, semi-analytical discussion of the major physical processes
involved. Our analysis indicates that depending on the relation between the axion mass and the
black hole size all three classes of signatures can be observable for diﬀerent systems. This provides
strong motivation for further numerical analysis of axionic superradiance.

Let us brieﬂy summarize our main results. In Fig. 3 we show the black hole Regge plot for two

7

(cid:45)22(cid:45)20(cid:45)18(cid:45)16(cid:45)14(cid:45)12(cid:45)10246810AxionmassΜΑinLog10(cid:72)ΜΑeV(cid:76)BlackholemassinLog10MblackholeMsolarFigure 3: The regions in the black hole Regge plane aﬀected by superradiance for the QCD axion
with m = 3 · 10−11 eV (the upper panel) and for a lighter axion with m = 10−17 eV. The data
points correspond to spin measurements obtained by ﬁtting the thermal continuum X-ray spectra
[5]. Old black holes are expected to be found in the shaded region, where they are not aﬀected by
superradiance. Young black holes may be found also on the dashed colored lines inside the gap.
Diﬀerent colors correspond to superradiant levels with diﬀerent orbital quantum numbers l.

8

l(cid:61)1l(cid:61)2l(cid:61)3l(cid:61)4l(cid:61)5l(cid:61)6l(cid:61)7l(cid:61)824681012140.00.20.40.60.81.0BlackHoleMassinunitsofMsolarBlackHoleSpinargl(cid:61)1l(cid:61)2l(cid:61)3l(cid:61)45.0(cid:180)1061.0(cid:180)1071.5(cid:180)1072.0(cid:180)1070.00.20.40.60.81.0BlackHoleMassinunitsofMsolarBlackHoleSpinargdiﬀerent axion masses. The upper plot corresponds to an axion mass of µa = 3 · 10−11 eV, which
is the mass of the QCD axion for fa = 2 · 1017 GeV, and the lower illustrates the eﬀect of a lighter
axion with µa = 10−17 eV. Black holes in the shadowed region are not aﬀected by superradiance
during the age of the Universe. Suﬃciently old black holes are expected to be found in this region.
In the plot corresponding to the QCD axion we also present existing spin measurements; this data
suggest an upper bound on the QCD axion decay constant of 2 · 1017 GeV.

Note that the uncolored gap regions exhibit internal structure (dashed lines), reﬂecting the
quantized behavior of the gravitational black hole atom. Black holes may stay on these lines,
the “Regge trajectories”, for cosmological time scales. In order to understand this behavior, we
should note that there is a number of diﬀerent superradiant bound states labeled by diﬀerent
angular quantum number l. The instability time-scale rapidly drops down as the orbital quantum
number l increases. Therefore, the spin-down process of the black hole is initially driven by the
level with the minimum value of l for which the superradiance condition (3) is satisﬁed, and stops
when enough spin has been extracted, so that the superradiance instability rate goes to zero —
the superradiance condition is now saturated. At this point the black hole ﬁnds itself on one of
the dashed lines of the Regge plot.

Next, we should expect that the black hole spin-down proceeds with the growth of the level
with the next-to-largest superradiance rate, i.e., the l + 1 level. However, further spin-down is
damped when the black hole reaches one of the Regge trajectories as a consequence of axion self-
interactions. The axions bound to the level that is no longer superradiating serve as an axially
asymmetric perturbation to the system that mixes superradiant with non-superradiant levels and
shuts oﬀ the black hole spin-down process. This is similar to introducing a non-spherical defect
on the mirror in the Press-Teukolsky black hole bomb: photons reﬂected from the mirror exit the
superradiant region (3) and are now absorbed by the black hole, turning the instability oﬀ. As a
result of these axion non-linearities, black holes stay on the Regge trajectories until various axion
loss processes, or a violent accretion event, dissipate the cloud down to a small enough size, such
that non-linearities no longer inhibit the instability. Then the black hole rapidly jumps to the
next Regge trajectory by populating the level with a larger orbital quantum number.

Axion non-linearities trigger yet another dramatic eﬀect during transitions between Regge
trajectories. Namely, attractive axion self-interactions result in a catastrophic instability of the
axion cloud and its subsequent collapse. The analogous eﬀect has been observed in laboratory
BEC systems with attractive self-interactions and is known under the name “Bosenova” [25]. We
ﬁnd that, depending on the parameters, transitions between Regge trajectories proceed through
a series of tens to hundreds of Bosenova events. These events produce gravitational waves, and,
in the case of the QCD axion, gamma- and X-rays that may be detectable on the Earth.

The black hole may also emit gravitational waves at the observable level due to axion transitions
between diﬀerent levels and annihilations to gravitons. Accurate prediction of the strength and
duration of the signal requires a more detailed analysis of the dynamics; in the current paper we
limit ourselfs to qualitative estimates which imply that this signal is detectable. It is especially
exciting that the gravitational wave signal from the QCD axion cloud around stellar mass black
holes falls into the Advanced LIGO frequency band and turns it into a particle discovery machine.
In Fig. 4 we present the estimated signal strength as a function of the axion and black hole masses
for a source at a 20 Mpc distance from the Earth. We choose a coherent integration time for the

9

Figure 4: The contour plot of constant gravitational wave signal from axion transitions between
the 6g and the 5g levels for a black hole located at 20 Mpc away from the Earth. The projected
sensitivity curves of Advanced LIGO [26] and Einstein Telescope [27] assume 104 seconds of a
coherent integration time.

signal of 104 second , when drawing the sensitivity curves.

The paper is organized as follows. We start with explaining the basics of superradiance in
Section 2. We argue that the non-relativistic approximation is accurate for describing superradiant
levels for most of the parameter space, and adequate at least qualitatively at all values of the
parameters. We present semi-analytical results for the superradiant rates, that are accurate over
a large part of the parameter space and enough for our purposes.

In Section 3 we discuss the processes that determine the dynamics of the superradiant cloud—
gravitational wave emission and axion non-linearities. We provide approximate expressions for the
relevant transition rates, and for characteristic timescales and masses of the superradiant cloud
when diﬀerent processes, such as Bosenova collapse, happen.

In Section 4 we combine all of the above ingredients and discuss how the superradiant instability
develops and what are the associated observational signatures. We discuss in detail the black hole
spin-down and of the Regge trajectories. We then estimate the gravitational wave signals during

10

EinsteinTelescopeAdvancedLIGO10(cid:45)2710(cid:45)2610(cid:45)2510(cid:45)2410(cid:45)23(cid:45)13.0(cid:45)12.5(cid:45)12.0(cid:45)11.5(cid:45)11.0(cid:45)10.5(cid:45)10.0(cid:45)9.50.60.81.01.21.41.61.820AxionmassinLog10ΜaeVΜa(cid:180)rgBlackHoleMassinLog10MBHMsolarforΜa(cid:180)rg(cid:61)1transitions between Regge trajectories and brieﬂy comment on prospects for directly detecting the
axionic cloud around supermassive black holes during extreme mass ratio inspirals.

We also focus on the potential reach for the QCD axion, and some possible QCD axion speciﬁc
signatures related to its direct coupling to Standard Model ﬁelds. A particularly intriguing eﬀect of
the QCD axion is that the eﬀective value of the QCD θ-parameter may become of order one inside
the cloud. This possibly destabilizes nuclei in the accretion disk and results in γ-ray signals and
exotic X-ray lines from the nuclear decay products in the black hole vicinity. We ﬁnally entertain
the possibility of radio waves from axion-to-photon conversion in the near-horizon magnetic ﬁeld.
Section 5 elaborates on an issue which is aside from the main line of the paper, but still a very
important part of the theoretical motivations for string axions in the mass range probed by the
black hole superradiance. Namely, all these axions are “anthropic”—their initial misalignment
angle needs to be tuned to an atypically small value in the observed part of the Universe. It has
been known for a long time [28], that this is not a problem for a single QCD axion, and here we
discuss what changes if several anthropic axions are present. We conclude in Section 6.

2 Spectroscopy of superradiance

In this section we review the spectroscopy of superradiant levels around a rotating black hole.
Throughout the paper we are using the Boyer-Lindquist coordinates for the spinning black hole
metric [29]

ds2 = −(1 −

2rgr
Σ

)dt2 −

4rgar sin2 θ
Σ

dtdφ +

Σ
∆

dr2 + Σdθ2 +

(r2 + a2)2 − a2∆ sin2 θ
Σ
J
M

g − a2 , a =
r2

(cid:113)

sin2 θdφ2 ,

Σ = r2 + a2 cos2 θ , ∆ = (r − r+)(r − r−) r± = rg ±

, rg = GN M ,

(5)

where M and J are black hole’s mass and spin, respectively. The physical horizon corresponds to
the larger root of ∆, which is r = r+.

One of the most fundamental equations for the understanding of superradiance is condition
(3), so let us review how it arises, following [29]. Interestingly, one has to know remarkably little
about the Kerr geometry to derive (3). The ﬁrst fact one needs is that the black hole metric in the
Boyer–Lindquist coordinates is invariant under time translations, or more formally it possesses
the Killing vector Hµ∂µ = ∂t. Second, it possesses another Killing vector related to rotational
invariance, J µ∂µ = ∂ϕ and the linear combination

G = H + w+J ,

is normal to the horizon and null there. In the above equation w+ is given by (4).

Now, let us consider an incoming wave of a scalar ﬁeld of the form

The conserved energy ﬂux of this ﬁeld is given by

φ = e−iωt+imϕf (r, θ) + h.c. .

Pµ = −TµνHν = −∂µφ∂tφ +

1
2

gµtL ,

11

where Tµν and L are the energy-momentum tensor and the Lagrangian density for φ, respectively.
For a space-time region between two constant time slices, conservation of the current Pµ implies
that the time-averaged energy ﬂux at the inﬁnity is equal to the time-averaged energy ﬂux through
the black hole horizon. The latter is equal to

(cid:104)PµGµ(cid:105) = −(cid:104)(∂tφ + ω+∂φφ)∂tφ(cid:105) = ω(ω − mω+)|f |2 ,

(6)

where the gµν-term in the energy-momentum tensor dropped out because vectors G and H are
perpendicular at the horizon. We see that the energy ﬂux is negative in the superradiant frequency
range indicating that the wave gets ampliﬁed in this regime. The argument changes a bit when
the frequency ω corresponds to the discrete spectrum so that the energy ﬂux at the inﬁnity
necessarily vanishes. In this case the only way to reconcile the ﬂux (6) at the horizon with the
energy conservation is for the frequency ω to acquire an imaginary part, so that the time-averaged
energies on the two constant time slices are not equal any longer. For the real part of the frequency
in the superradiant interval (3) the imaginary part should be positive indicating the presence of
an instability.

One important consequence of the instability condition (3) is that the superradiant levels are
always in a (quasi)non-relativistic Keplerian regime. Indeed, in this regime the real part of the
frequency follows the hydrogen spectrum

(cid:18)

ω¯n ≈ µa

1 −

(cid:19)

,

α2
2¯n2

(7)

where ¯n = n + l + 1 is the principal quantum number, l is the orbital moment and α = µarg. For
such a level the velocity of the particle is

v ∼

α
¯n

.

(8)

On the other hand, if we approximate the frequency in the superradiance condition (3) by the
axion mass, ωn ≈ µa, the condition translates into a bound

α (cid:46) mw+ =

m
2

a
r+

,

(9)

where we made use of the expression (4) for w+. We see now that the velocity for superradiant
states may be at most moderately relativistic,
v (cid:46) 1
2

m
¯n

(10)

1
2

<

,

a
r+

where the bound is saturated at the upper boundary of the superradiant range (3) for extremal
black holes a = r+, at n = 0 and large l = m (cid:29) 1.

In principle, this argument does not exclude the presence of a family of non-hydrogenic unstable
bound states, however numerical results of [30] conﬁrm that all superradiant states are hydrogenic.

We can also estimate the size of the axion cloud as

rc ∼

¯n2
α2 rg ,

12

(11)

which is always signiﬁcantly larger than the black hole gravitational radius, as a consequence of
(3).

These estimates provide the following physical picture of the superradiant axion cloud. The
cloud is composed of a wave packet of the axion ﬁeld rotating on a Keplerian orbit around the
black hole. This axion wave packet always has a tail that goes into the near-horizon ergosphere
region and gets ampliﬁed there leading to the exponential growth of the number of axions in the
packet.

Given the complexity of the Kerr metric it is not surprising that a precise analytical expression
for superradiant rates is unavailable (partial numerical results can be found in [30]). However,
the above physical picture gives rise to two useful analytical approximations for the superradiant
rates. Before introducing them let us recall that the massive Klein–Gordon equation in the Kerr
background allows separation of variables [31] with the following simple ansatz for the scalar ﬁeld

φ = e−iωt+imϕY (θ)R(r) + h.c. .

The equation for Y (θ) is the standard equation for the ﬂat space spherical harmonics plus an extra
term that can be neglected if (α/l)2 (cid:28) 1. As before, the superradiant condition (3) implies that
(α/l)2 < 1/4, so we will always use this approximation (one can check its accuracy using known
numerical results for oblate spheroidal harmonics, see e.g. [32]). Then the equation for the radial
function R takes the form

∆∂r(∆∂rR) + (cid:0)ω2(r2 + a2)2 − 4argrmω + a2m2 − ∆(µ2

ar2 + a2ω2 + l(l + 1)(cid:1) R = 0 .

(12)

At the horizon, a non-singular solution of this equation satisﬁes [23]

R = const · e−i(ω−mw+)r∗ as r → r+ ,

where r∗ is the “tortoise” coordinate deﬁned through

dr∗ = (r2 + a2)∆−1dr .

2.1 Non-relativistic approximation α/l (cid:28) 1

(13)

(14)

This approximation [18, 20], that initially was applied for superradiant scattering rather than the
calculation of the instability rate [16], makes use of the separation of scales between the size of
the cloud and the black hole horizon following from relations (9), (11). The radial equation is now
solved in two diﬀerent regimes: the near and far horizon regions. In the region far from the black
hole horizon, r (cid:29) rg, neglecting terms suppressed by (α/l)2, the solution takes the same form as
the radial wave function of the Schroedinger equation with an 1/r potential,

Rf ar(r) = (2kr)le−krU (l + 1 −

α2
rgk

, 2(l + 1), 2kr) ,

(15)

where U is the conﬂuent hypergeometric function of the second kind, and k is the axion momentum,

k2 = µ2

a − ω2 .

13

(16)

In the ordinary Schroedinger equation with an 1/r potential the spectrum of frequencies ω is
determined by requiring the regularity of R at the origin. Instead, in the black hole case one has
to impose the regularity of the ﬁeld at the horizon—the incoming wave boundary condition (13).
One way to do this is to solve the radial equation (12) in the near horizon regime. After dropping
terms of order α/l the solution in the near-horizon region, 0 < r − r+ (cid:28) (l/α)2rg, that satisﬁes
the boundary condition (13) takes the form

Rnear(r) =

(cid:19)−iP

(cid:18) r − r+
r − r−

2F1(−l, l + 1, 1 + 2iP,

r − r−
r+ − r−

) ,

(17)

where

P = 2r+

ω − mw+
r+ − r−

and 2F1 is the Gauss’s hypergeometric function. At α/l (cid:28) 1 the ranges of validity for the two
approximate solutions (15) and (17) have an overlap, so the approach in [18, 20] was to match the
lowest terms of the Taylor expansion for Rf ar at small r with the asymptotic behavior of (17) at
large r, with the following result for the imaginary part of the frequency,

Γlmn = 2µα4l+4r+(mw+ − µa)Clmn ,

(18)

where

Clmn =

24l+2(2l + n + 1)!
(l + n + 1)2l+4n!

(cid:18)

l!
(2l)!(2l + 1)!

(cid:19)2

(cid:18)

l
(cid:89)

(cid:18)

1 −

j2

j=1

(cid:19)

a2
r2
g

+ 4r2

+(mw+ − µa)2

(cid:19)

.

Note that the real part is well approximated by the hydrogen spectrum (7). These approximate
formulaes exhibit many of the features of the full answer.
In particular, the sign of Γlmn is
determined by the sign of (mw+ − µa), in agreement with (3) within the accuracy of the non-
relativistic approximation used to derive (18). Also, in the regime of applicability of (18), α/l (cid:28) 1,
widths Γlmn drop exponentially as l increases. This implies that for a given value of α the fastest
superradiant level is the one with a smallest possible l, i.e., the l = m level with m chosen in such
a way that the superradiance condition (3) is satisﬁed.

It will be important in what follows that as l grows the radial quantum number n for the
fastest superradiant level grows as well. For instance, using (18) we ﬁnd that for l = m = 4 the
instability rate for the n = 1 level is faster than for the n = 0 level,

Γ440
Γ441

≈ 0.9.

(19)

The result (18) is often referred to as the “low mass” or small α approximation. However, as
the above derivation shows, the approximate solutions (15) and (17) hold and have an overlapping
regime of validity at large α as well, as long as α/l (cid:28) 1. It is true, though, that (18) may be
quite inaccurate close to the superradiance boundary α (cid:46) w+, both due to the inaccuracy of the
approximate solutions and because the overlap interval where both of the solutions hold shrinks.

14

Figure 5: Superradiance rates obtained using our semi-analytic method (solid lines), non-
relativistic approximation (dashed lines) and WKB approximation (dotted line) for a near-
extremal black hole, a/rg = 0.999. Diﬀerent colors correspond to superradiant levels with diﬀerent
values of the angular quantum number l.

To have better control of the precision and to improve on the latter deﬃciency of (18) we adopt
the following semi-analytic procedure, which is similar to that in [33]. Instead of matching the
leading terms in the asymptotic expansions of (15), (17) we numerically matched these functions
and their ﬁrst derivatives at a point r∗ within the overlap region. To ﬁnd the optimal value for r∗
we calculated the relative residuals after plugging Rf ar and Rnear in the original radial equation
(12). We pick r∗ as the point where the two residuals are equal. We present our semianalytical
results for the instability rates in Fig. 5 (solid lines) together with the instability rates given by
(18) (dashed lines). Diﬀerent lines correspond to diﬀerent l = m levels, and we picked the radial
quantum number n to maximize the superradiance level in each case (the dependence on n is very
mild).

These results were obtained for a near extremal black hole with a/rg = 0.999. The instability
rate decreases very slowly with spin for small α, and the main eﬀect of reducing the spin is that
the instability shuts down earlier, at αm = mw+(a) for the diﬀerent l = m levels, as follows from
the superradiant condition (3). To illustrate this in Fig. 6 we present the superradiance rates for
l = 1 level for several values of a/rg.

We see that (18) perfectly agrees with our semi-analytic results at suﬃciently small α/l, but

15

l(cid:61)1l(cid:61)2l(cid:61)3l(cid:61)4l(cid:61)50.51.01.52.02.510(cid:45)1610(cid:45)1410(cid:45)1210(cid:45)1010(cid:45)810(cid:45)6Μa(cid:137)rgSuperradianceRateinunitsofrg(cid:45)1Figure 6: Superradiance rates obtained using our semi-analytic method (solid lines) for diﬀerent
values of the black hole spin.

they quickly start being diﬀerent indicating that the procedure of matching the leading terms of
the asymptotic expansions that results in (18) is not very accurate. Of course, our semi-analytic
results are also not good enough for precision calculations close to the superradiant boundary,
α ∼ mw+, however, they agree quite well with numerical calculations in [30] (at least for l = 1, 2, 3
presented in [30] ) and with the WKB results presented in the next subsection. In particular, the
superradiance rate of [30] is maximum, Γ ≈ 1.5 · 10−7r−1
g , at α ≈ 0.42 in a good agreement with
our results. As we will see, many of the observational consequences of superradiance are not very
sensitive to the exact values of the superradiance rates at α ∼ mw+, so this level of precision is
enough for our purposes.

2.2 WKB approximation α (cid:29) 1

Another useful approximation for the superradiant rates [19], complementary to the slow velocity
expansion above, is the WKB method that can be applied at α (cid:29) 1. We will closely follow the
methodology of [19], however, our results disagree with [19] by an important factor of two in the
expression for the tunneling exponent. Most likely, this factor was accidentally missed in [19] (this
discrepancy was also pointed out in [34] without any derivation).

In this approach, the tail of the wave function that propagates in the ergo-region, where su-

16

0.00.10.20.30.40.510(cid:45)1610(cid:45)1410(cid:45)1210(cid:45)1010(cid:45)810(cid:45)6Μa(cid:137)rgSuperradianceRateinunitsofrg(cid:45)1arg(cid:61)0.5arg(cid:61)0.6arg(cid:61)0.7arg(cid:61)0.8arg(cid:61)0.9arg(cid:61)0.999Figure 7: The shape of the radial Schroedinger potential for the eigenvalue problem in the rotating
black hole background. Superradiant modes are localized in a potential well region created by
the mass “mirror” from the spatial inﬁnity on the right, and by the centrifugal barrier from the
ergo-region and horizon on the left.

perradiant ampliﬁcation takes place, is calculated using the WKB approximation. This is just a
classic tunneling calculation. Indeed, after switching to the tortoise coordinate (14) and introduc-
ing Ψ = (r2 + a2)1/2R the radial equation (12) takes the form of the Schr¨odinger equation

d2Ψ
dr2
∗

− V Ψ = 0

(20)

with the potential

V = −ω2 +

4rgramω − a2m2
(r2 + a2)2

+

∆
r2 + a2

(cid:18)

µ2
a +

l(l + 1) + k2a2
r2 + a2

+

3r2 − 4rgr + a2

(r2 + a2)2 −

3∆r2
(r2 + a2)3

(cid:19)

(21)
We include the (−ω2) term in the deﬁnition of the potential, because even if we were to separate
it, there would be a residual dependence on ω. We present the qualitative shape of the potential
V for a typical choice of parameters in Fig. 7. One can clearly see the potential well where the
bound Keplerian orbits are localized and a barrier separating this region from the near-horizon
region where superradiant ampliﬁcation takes place.

Consequently, the axion wave function at the horizon r = r+ (corresponding to r∗ = −∞)
is suppressed relative to the wave function in the vicinity of the Keplerian orbit by a tunneling
exponent,

|R(r+)| (cid:39) |R(rc)|e−I ,

17

Ergo-regionBarrierregionPotential WellExponentialgrowth regionPotentialr*⟵ Black Hole Horizon“Mirror” at r~1/µwhere the tunneling integral I is

(cid:90) r∗(r2)

√

V =

dr∗

(cid:90) r2

dr

I =

r∗(r1)

r1

√

V (r2 + a2)
∆

,

(22)

with r1,2 being the boundaries of the clasically forbidden region. We will only follow the leading
exponential dependence on e−I and do not aim at calculating the normalization prefactor in front
of the exponent.

To relate the tunneling exponent with the rate of superradiance instability let us consider again

the energy ﬂow equation (6). Integrating it over the horizon we obtain

dE
dt

= ω(mw+ − ω)

(cid:90)

horizon

|Y (θ)R(r+)|2 ,

(23)

where E is the energy in the axion cloud. The energy is maximum in the Keplerian region, so that
in the limit where we only keep track of the dependence on the exponent e−I we can write

and, consequently, to rewrite (23) as

E ∝ |R(rc)|2 (cid:39) e2I|R(r+)|2 ,

dE
dt

= const · (mw+ − ω)e−2IE .

In other words, the WKB approximation for the superradiance rate gives1

Γ = γ(mw+ − ω)e−2I ,

(24)

(25)

where the normalization prefactor is determined mainly by the spread of the wave function in the
classically allowed region. We will limit ourself by calculating the exponential part Γ. We leave
the technical details for the Appendix, and present only the ﬁnal result here. Namely, the ﬁnal
answer for the tunneling integral in the extremal Kerr geometry takes the form

I = π

(cid:16)

(cid:17)
2α − (cid:112)2α(α − 1)

,

which translates in the following superradiant rate,

ΓW KB ≈ 10−7r−1

g e−2πα(2−

√

2) ≈ 10−7r−1

g e−3.7α ,

(26)

(27)

where we took the large α limit in (26) and chose the prefactor to match the low α results of
section 2.1 (this value also agrees with that of [19] and [34]). As we already said, the exponent
in (27) is larger than that in [19] by a factor of two. As explained in the Appendix, the rate (27)
provides an upper envelope for superradiance rates at diﬀerent l in the large α limit. We have
presented (27) by a dotted line in Fig. 5; it agrees reasonably well with the previous α/l (cid:28) 1
results.

1Note, that at this stage we still agree with [19].

18

3 Dynamics of superradiance

Let us turn now to discussing the dynamical consequences of the superradiant instability. One
important property of the rates calculated in section 2 is that the time-scale for the development
of the instability is quite slow compared to the natural dynamical scale rg close to the black hole
sr > 107rg. Consequently, in many cases non-linear eﬀects, both gravitational, and due
horizon, Γ−1
to axion self-interactions, become important in the regime where the system is still in the quasi-
linear regime, so that non-linearities can be treated perturbatively. Then the dynamics of the
axion cloud can be described by the following set of kinetic equations for the occupation numbers
Ni for diﬀerent levels,

dNi
dt

= ΓijNj + ΓijkNjNk + . . . .

(28)

This equation gets simpliﬁed in the quasilinear regime where we can truncate the expansion in
the r.h.s. of (28), by keeping just a ﬁnite number of terms. Note that for simplicity, we drop
Ni-independent terms in the r.h.s. of (28); those terms correspond to spontaneous emission.

To avoid confusion, let us clarify the following. Throughout this paper we often use quantum
terminology (occupation numbers, transition between levels, etc.) to describe the axionic cloud.
This appears to be perfectly appropriate given that the size of the cloud is comparable to the
Compton wavelength of the axion. On the other hand, occupation numbers for all dynamically
relevant levels will always be exponentially large in what follows, ∼ 1070, so that all the dynamics
can be accurately described by a classical ﬁeld theory. Of course, there is no contradiction here and
both descriptions are correct. The very fact that we can use classical ﬁeld theory to describe the
dynamics of axion particles in the cloud reﬂects its quantum mechanical origin. For instance, in
the classical ﬁeld description instead of using occupation numbers Ni one can Fourier decompose
classical ﬁeld into harmonics with diﬀerent frequencies and follow the (squared) amplitudes for
diﬀerent harmonics. Given numerous analogies with atomic physics we ﬁnd the quantum language
useful in many cases, but will also use the classical one, when more convenient.

Coming back to the kinetic equations (28), at the linear level, the r.h.s. of (28) is determined

by the superradiant rates presented in section 2. Namely,

Γij = δijΓi ,

(29)

where Γi is the imaginary part of the frequency for the i-th level—positive for levels satisfying (3)
and negative otherwise. There could be other model dependent sources of linear terms in (28).
For instance, if an axion has an electromagnetic coupling

Cα
4πfa

φ(cid:15)µνλρFµνFλρ ,

(30)

where C is an order one constant (for the QCD axion C = 4/3 in 4d grand uniﬁed theories), then
in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld axions will convert into photons with a rate [1]

Γ ∼ 7 · 10−11yr−1

(cid:18) 1016GeV
fa

(cid:19)2 (cid:16)

µa
6 · 10−10eV

(cid:17) (cid:18) B

(cid:19)2

4 · 108G

,

(31)

19

where the reference values for the parameters are chosen to be those for the QCD axion, and the
choice of a reference magnetic ﬁeld is motivated by the estimate (Eq. (75) of [35])

B ∼ 4 × 108G

(cid:19)−1/2

(cid:18) M
M(cid:12)

(32)

for the largest magnetic ﬁeld the accretion disc can support near the horizon of a black hole of
mass M . It is evident from (31) that axion-photon conversion is too slow to be relevant for the
dynamics of superradiance.

To describe the development of the superradiant instability one needs to supplement (28) with
equations for the time evolution of the black hole mass M and spin J. These depend on the
environment of each individual black hole, but, in general, accretion in the absence of mergers or
other violent events has a characteristic time scale whose lower bound is set by the Eddington
time τE

τE ≡

σT
4πGN mp

≈ 4 · 108 yr .

(33)

The value of τE shows that the superradiant instability time, even though much shorter than the
black hole infall time, is much faster than the evolution time scale for astrophysical black holes. As
a result, for most of the discussion that follows we will ignore accretion, unless stated otherwise.
For example, in section 4.5, we discuss a particular accretion model.

Let us describe now the leading non-linear processes, which should be included in (28) to
describe the development of the superradiant instability. The two sources of non-linearities are
gravitational interactions of axions and non-linearities in the axion potential itself.

3.1 Gravity wave emission

The axion cloud may lose its energy and angular momentum by emitting gravitational waves.
There are two major processes giving rise to graviton emission. The ﬁrst is analogous to photon
emission from atoms — this is just the transition of axions from one level to another. The major
diﬀerence in the present case is that the transition rates between populated levels get enhanced
by their occupation numbers.

The other process of graviton emission is less familiar. Unlike electrons in the atom, axions
do not carry any conserved charge. Consequently, they can emit gravitational waves also through
processes that do not conserve the axion number. In particular, one-graviton annihilation of two
axions is possible at the same order of perturbation theory as the transition between diﬀerent levels,
i.e., the corresponding amplitude is proportional to M −1
P l . Of course, this process is kinematically
forbidden in ﬂat space, where only two-graviton annihilation (with amplitude proportional to M −2
P l )
is compatible with energy and momentum conservation. However, the black hole gravitational
ﬁeld breaks translational invariance, so that one-graviton annihilation is allowed for axions in the
presence of a black hole. The closest analogue of this process in atomic physics is the one-photon
annihilation of a positron with an atomic electron [36].

This annihilation process is quite unconventional, because the graviton momentum is deter-
mined by the axion mass kg ≈ 2µa and is parametrically larger than the momentum of axions in

20

the cloud ka ∼ (α/l)µa. In other words, unlike for conventional astrophysical sources of gravita-
tional waves, the wavelength of an emitted radiation is not parametrically longer than the size of
the source (even though the cloud is non-relativistic), and the standard quadrupole approximation
does not apply.

3.1.1 General formalism

The calculation of the gravitational wave ﬂux due to both kind of processes is further complicated
by the fact that the system is bound by gravity, and the axion cloud is not that far from the
black hole horizon, where the gravitational ﬁeld is non-linear. However, these complications can
be safely ignored for order of magnitude estimates, which are enough for our purposes. To perform
the estimates it is convenient to switch to the classical ﬁeld theory description. Let us write the
axion ﬁeld of the cloud in the form

φ =

(cid:88)

ω

e−iωtχ(ω, ϕ, r, θ) + h.c. ,

(34)

where the frequencies ω ran over diﬀerent bound levels in the black hole geometry. The related
expansion of the scalar energy-momentum tensor takes the form

Tµν =

(cid:88)

ω(cid:48)

e−iω(cid:48)tτµν(ω(cid:48), ϕ, r, θ) + h.c. .

(35)

To estimate the gravitational wave ﬂux from the axion cloud we use the ﬂat space formula [37]
for the gravitational wave power,

where

dP
sin θdθdϕ

=

GN ω2
π

τ T T ∗
ij

(ω, k)τ T T

ij (ω, k) ,

(cid:90)

τij(ω, k) ≡

d3xτij(ω, x)e−ikx

(36)

(37)

where x denotes the ﬂat space Descartes coordinates, |k| = ω, and the T T superscript stands for
the projector on the transverse-traceless part,

where

τ T T
ij ≡ (Pii(cid:48)Pjj(cid:48) −

1
2

PijPi(cid:48)j(cid:48))τ T T

i(cid:48)j(cid:48) ,

Pij = δij −

kikj
k2

.

In this classical language the graviton emission due to axion transitions between levels correspond
to terms in the harmonic expansion (35) of the energy-momentum tensor of the form

e−i(ω−ω(cid:48))tχ(ω)χ∗(ω(cid:48)) + h.c. ,

21

where, for simplicity, we dropped all the derivatives appearing in the expression for Tµν. On the
other hand, the annihilation processes correspond to terms of the form

e−i(ω+ω(cid:48))tχ(ω)χ(ω(cid:48)) + h.c.

To calculate the gravitational wave power, one needs to solve for the scalar ﬁeld harmonics χ(ω)
in the black hole background and plug them into (36). This is similar to calculating the trajectory
of a compact stellar mass object falling into a galactic mass black hole in the probe particle
approximation, and using this trajectory as a source in the linearized Einstein equations to solve
for the hij components of the metric, that determine the ﬂux of gravitational waves. In principle,
the latter step should be done in the curved geometry—the ﬂat space approximation is just an
estimate both for the overall rate and for the frequency proﬁle of the gravitational wave signal.
For instance, for the annihilation signal from a single populated level with the frequency ω the ﬂat
space expression (36) predicts the monochromatic gravitational wave line of frequency 2ω, while
taking into account deviations from the ﬂat space would induce the broadening of the line due to
gravitational redshift.

However, given the separation of scales between the size of the axion cloud and the black hole
size, we expect that by using the ﬂat space expression (36) we are making at most order one mistake
in the overall rate, which is accurate enough for our purposes. For the same reason, the spectral
distortions should be rather small. It is likely that one still needs to calculate more accurately
the spectral shape of the signal (the waveform) to be able to observe it with gravitational wave
detectors. This is a technically involved calculation, which is beyond the scope of the current
paper. Note that in [38], where gravitational waveforms in the Kerr metric are calculated, the ﬂat
space approximation gives quite accurate results.

The other approximation we adopt to evaluate (36) is rather than solving for the eigenfunction
χ(ω, ϕ, r, θ) in the full Kerr background we will just use the Newtonian approximation for the
metric. Again, this is justiﬁed because the cloud is mainly localized relatively far from the black
hole horizon. In this approximation the eigenfunctions χ(ω, ϕ, r, θ) are the familiar wave functions
for the electron states in a hydrogen atom, and the evaluation of (36) becomes straightforward.
Let us present here some representative results of this calculation that we will use later in section 4.

3.1.2 Axion transitions between levels in a black hole atom

Let us start with the more familiar case of graviton emission due to axion transitions between
levels. As we will see in section 4 an important source of potentially observable gravitational
radiation is related to axion transitions between levels with equal angular quantum numbers l and
m, but with diﬀerent radial quantum numbers n. This process will be relevant for suﬃciently
high l, such that the fastest superradiant level has n > 0. For instance, as we saw in section 2.1,
for l = m = 4 level the n = 1 superradiant level is faster than n = 0, Eq.(19). For the transition
between these two levels (36) gives

dP
sin θdθdϕ

(6g → 5g) ≈ N1N0

22334105GN α12
1122πr4
g

sin4 θ + · · · ≈ 3 · 10−10N1N0

GN α12
r4
g

sin4 θ ,

(38)

22

where N1 and N0 are the occupation numbers for the two levels and dots stand for higher order
terms in the small α expansion (we checked that they can be neglected in the superradiant regime
α (cid:46) 2).

For transitions between levels the wavelength of an emitted graviton is much longer than the
size of the system, so the conventional quadrupole formulae for a graviton emission should also
be a good approximation. As a cross-check of our calculation let us compare result (38) with the
quadrupole formula. For the transition rate between two levels the latter gives [37]

dN1
dt

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)quadr

= N1N0

2GN ∆ω5
5

IijIij ,

where ∆ω is the frequency splitting, which in our case is equal to

∆ω =

µaα2
2

(cid:18) 1
25

−

1
36

(cid:19)

,

and Iij is the transition mass quadrupole moment. For the estimate we take

IijIij ∼ µ2

ar4
c ,

where the size of the cloud rc is estimated by (11). Altogether, this gives

dN1
dt

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)quadr

(6g → 5g) ∼ 8 · 10−7N1N0

GN α9
r3
g

.

On the other hand, from (38) we get

dN1
dt

(6g → 5g) =

(cid:82)
angles dP
∆w

≈ 3 · 10−7N1N0

GN α9
r3
g

(39)

(40)

(41)

(42)

in a perfect agreement with (41).

Proceeding as above it is straightforward to calculate other transition rates. For instance,
for transitions from the fastest (n = 0) l = 2 superradiant level to the fastest (also n = 0)
l = 1 superradiant level one gets (for simplicity, we present only the total power integrated over
directions)

P (3d → 2p) ≈ N1N0

5717 · 28GN α14
3551173r4
g

≈ 4 · 10−7N1N0

GN α14
r4
g

.

(43)

This rate is suppressed by a higher power of α, because the quadrupole transition between these
two levels is forbidden.

3.1.3 Axion annihilations

We see that for estimating the transition rates one can use the standard multipole formulae. As
we said, this is no longer the case for annihilations, where the wavelength of an emitted graviton
is shorter than the size of the cloud. In this case the suppression for the emission rate is related to

23

Figure 8: Total annihilation rates in units of r−1
superradiant levels with l = 1, 2, 3.

g

for Mcloud
MBH

= 10−4 as a function of α/l for the

the decoupling of high momentum modes—the Fourier transform in (37) involves convolution of
the slowly varying energy-momentum tensor of the axion cloud with a rapidly oscillating exponent.
A direct calculation gives the following result for the annihilation rate at the 2p level, the fastest
superradiant level,

dP
sin θdθdϕ

(2 × 2p → graviton) ≈ N 2 9πGN α18

226r4
g

(35 + 28 cos 2θ + cos 4θ) ,

(44)

where we again expanded the full answer at small α and N is the occupation number. Note
that, unlike for transitions, the corrections from higher order terms in α change the answer for
the annihilation rate by a factor of order one close to the upper boundary of the superradiant
regime (3) (α ∼ 1/2), however this level of precision is enough for our estimates. We see that the
suppression for the annihilation rate at small α is much stronger than for transitions.

For higher l levels the suppression at small α becomes even stronger, because the multipole
number of the emitted graviton grows with l. For instance, the annihilation rate for the 3d level

24

0.300.350.400.450.5010(cid:45)1710(cid:45)1610(cid:45)1510(cid:45)14Μa(cid:180)rglAnnihihilationrateinunitsofrg(cid:45)1forMcloudMBH(cid:61)10(cid:45)4l(cid:61)m(cid:61)3l(cid:61)m(cid:61)2l(cid:61)m(cid:61)1scales as α20. Still, given that the power of α is already very high even for the p-level annihilation
and the suppression in the annihilation rate is determined by how non-relativistic axions in the
cloud are, one may expect the annihilation rates for diﬀerent levels to be comparable at equal
values of the axion velocity, or, equivalently, at equal values of α/l. To illustrate that this is
indeed the case, we present in Fig. 8 the annihilation rates for the ﬁrst three superradiant levels,
l = 1, 2, 3, in units of rg for a cloud mass of 10−4 M black hole as a function of α/l. We see that they
indeed agree within an order of magnitude.

3.2 Axion non-linearities

Let us turn now to another important source of nonlinear terms in (28)—self-interactions of the
axion ﬁeld itself. As we discussed, the superradiant cloud is always close to be non-relativistic,
so let us ﬁrst discuss the self-interaction eﬀects in the non-relativistic approximation.
In the
non-relativistic limit, the axion ﬁeld takes the form

φ =

√

1
2µa

(cid:0)e−iµatψ + eiµatψ∗(cid:1) ,

(45)

where the characteristic scales for space and time variations of the function ψ are much longer
than µ−1
a . Then we plug the ansatz (45) in the axion action and drop all rapidly oscillating terms.
As the result we obtain the following eﬀective action for ψ,

(cid:90)

d4x

Snr =

(cid:18)

iψ∗∂tψ −

1
2µa

∂iψ∂iψ∗ − µaΦψ∗ψ +

(ψ∗ψ)2

(cid:19)

,

1
16f 2
a

(46)

where Φ is the Newtonian gravitational potential of the black hole, and we kept only the leading
non-linear term from the axion potential. If we also drop the quartic self-interaction term in (46),
then the equation following from (46) is the conventional Schroedinger equation in the external
gravitational ﬁeld. As before, the superradiant instability can be thought of as coming from
an unconventional boundary condition at the origin. With the quartic term taken into account,
the axion action (46) leads to the non-linear Gross–Pitaevskii equation, well-known in condensed
matter physics to describe the dynamics of an interacting BEC (see, e.g., [39] for an introduction).
The sign of the interaction term in (46) corresponds to an attractive interaction between axions.
The black hole gravitational potential plays the role of the BEC trap.

Note, that as compared to gravity, axion self-interactions give rise to higher-order non-linearities
(quartic, rather than cubic), however, they are suppressed by the scale fa, which can be signiﬁ-
cantly lower than MP l.

Let us describe the major consequences of these non-linearities. We postpone the systematic
discussion of how superradiant instability develops till the next section 4, but it is intuitively clear
that typically the axion ﬁeld in the cloud is dominated by a single harmonic in the expansion
(34)—the one corresponding to the fastest available superradiant level. This is especially natural
to expect at small and moderately large values of α, when superradiant levels are very sparse. So
let’s ﬁrst consider how non-linearities aﬀect a cloud composed of a single superradiant level.

25

3.2.1 Bosenova

As the number of axions in the cloud increases, the attractive force between axions becomes more
and more important and at some point the shape of the cloud changes signiﬁcantly as compared
to the one corresponding to the unperturbed hydrogen wave functions. We can estimate when
this happens by equating the potential energy of axions in the cloud to the self-interaction energy,

α
r

∼

ψ∗ψ
8f 2
a

.

(47)

By integrating (47) over the volume we obtain that self-interaction eﬀects become important in
determining the shape of the cloud when

N (cid:38) 16παf 2

a r2

c ∼ 16π

l4
a r2
α3 f 2
g ,

where N is the number of axions. Here we made use of (11) for the size of the cloud, and set
¯n ∼ l. It is more convenient to write this bound as a condition on the mass Ma of the axion cloud,

Ma
MBH

(cid:38) 2

l4
α2

f 2
a
M 2
P l

.

(48)

We see that for typical values of the parameters we are interested in, fa ∼ MGU T , non-linearities
start playing an important role in determining the shape of the cloud quite early—when the cloud
constitutes only 10−4 ÷ 10−3 of the black hole mass, and even earlier if the axion scale fa is
signiﬁcantly below the GUT scale.

As the cloud grows and its size is close to saturating (48), the shape of the cloud is deformed
and is no longer determined by the hydrogen wave functions. However, a much more dramatic
eﬀect happens as the size of the cloud keeps growing. The eﬀect was experimentally observed
in trapped BEC’s with attractive interactions and is known under the name “Bosenova”. Above
some critical mass of the cloud the gradient energy of the axion ﬁeld (“quantum pressure”) cannot
compete with the attractive force due to self-interactions and the cloud collapses. Indeed, it follows
from (46) that the energy of the static cloud has the following parametric dependence on its size
r,

V (R) (cid:39) N

l(l + 1) + 1
2µar2

− N

α
r

+

N 2
32πf 2

a r3 .

(49)

At small N this energy has a minimum corresponding to a (meta)stable cloud, however, at large
N the last term in (49) dominates over the repulsion due to the quantum pressure term, and the
cloud collapses.

3.2.2 Shutdown of superradiance due to level mixing

Yet another important consequence of non-linearities is that they may stop further development
of superradiance. To see how, let us ﬁrst consider the Press–Teukolsky “black hole bomb”—a
rotating black hole surrounded by a spherical mirror. As we discussed in the Introduction, this

26

system provides the simplest example of a superradiant instability—a single photon introduced
inside the mirror and satisfying the superradiance condition (3) bounces between the mirror and
the horizon and gets ampliﬁed in the ergo-region. Now imagine that the mirror has a defect and
does not possess a perfect rotational symmetry around the axis of black hole rotation. Then, when
scattering oﬀ the mirror, some of the photons satisfying the superradiant condition (3) change
their quantum numbers. As a result they may exit the superradiant regime and be absorbed at
the horizon. If the defect is substantial enough this may dump the superradiant instability.

Coming back to axion superradiance, as a consequence of self-interactions the axion cloud itself
acts as a defect and may dump the further development of the instability when it becomes large
enough. To analyze this at a more quantitative level, let us write the axion wave function in the
form

ψ = ψ0 + δψ ,
where ψ0 ∝ e−i(ω0t−m0ϕ) is the ﬁeld of the axions populating the most occupied level, and δψ
is a perturbation. We assume that the time scale for the growth of the cloud is much longer
than the oscillation period for ψ and consider the dynamics at scales short compared to the
instability time—under these assumptions ω0 can be taken real. Then the linearized equation for
the perturbation δψ has the following form,

i∂tδψ = −

∂2
i δψ
2µa

+ µaΦδψ −

1
8f 2
a

(cid:0)2ψ∗

0ψ0δψ + ψ2

0δψ∗(cid:1) .

(50)

The interesting feature of this equation is that it mixes ψ and ψ∗; this property is typical for BEC
perturbations and gives rise to the notion of Bogoliubov’s quasiparticles. Namely, the solution to
(50) mixes postive and negative frequency components,

δψ = e−i(ω0t−m0ϕ) (cid:0)u(r, θ)e−i(δωt−δmϕ) − v∗(r, θ)ei(δωt−δmϕ)(cid:1) .

(51)

In the next section we will be interested in a situation, when the unperturbed cloud has parameters
very close to the boundary of the superradiant region, ω0 = m0w+ and the perturbation δψ
corresponds to the fastest available superradiant level, which is l = m = m0 + 1. This same
reasoning applies for the levels with m higher than m0 + 1. The ﬁrst term in (51) would give rise
to such a perturbation, however, we see that as a result of the interaction with the background
BEC, the perturbation has also an admixture of the non-superradiant m = m0 − 1 modes. Of such
modes the one with the fastest damping rate also has l = m0 − 1, and as far as we can tell, there
is no reason that would forbid an order one overlap of the function v with the l = m = m0 − 1
mode.

To see whether the perturbation (51) is superradiant or dumped, let us proceed as we did
before in the derivation of the time averaged energy ﬂux through the black hole horizon, (6). The
axion ﬁeld has now three diﬀerent harmonics with frequencies ω0, ω0 ± δω. However, only the
latter two contribute to the ﬂux, because the ﬁrst one saturates the superradiance condition (and
all cross-terms vanish as a result of time-averaging). As a result, the ﬂux takes the following form

(cid:104)PµGµ(cid:105) = ω1(ω1 − (m0 + 1)w+)|uh|2 + ω2(ω2 − (m0 − 1)w+)|vh|2 ,

(52)

27

where ω1,2 = µa + ω0 ± δω, and uh and vh are the values of the functions u and v at the black
hole horizon. For our choice of parameters, the u-term in (52) gives rise to the energy ﬂux from
the black hole, while the v-term gives rise to the ﬂux into the black hole. To deduce the direction
of the net energy ﬂux, let us recall that derivation of the WKB formula (25) implies, that the
functions uh, vh at the horizon are related to their values uc, vc at the location of the cloud as,

|uh|2
|vh|2 ∼

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Γ1
Γ2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

|uc|2
|vc|2 ,

where Γ1 and Γ2 are superradiance and dumping rates for the two levels.
In turn, the ratio
uc/vc is determined by the relative strength of the non-holomorphic in δψ term in the perturbed
Gross–Pitayevskii equation (50),

vc
uc

∼

ψ2
0
a µaΦ

8f 2

∼

N
a r2
8αf 2
c

.

Combining these two relations together, we obtain that the perturbation δψ is superradiant if the
number of axions in the cloud is smaller than

N (cid:46)

1/2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Γ1
Γ2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

16παf 2

a r2
c .

As in (48) it is convenient to rewrite this condition as a bound on the fractional mass of the axion
cloud,

Ma
MBH

(cid:46)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Γ1
Γ2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

1/2

2

l4
α2

f 2
a
M 2
P l

.

(53)

To estimate the ratio of rates in (53) we can use (18). In Fig. 9 we plot the result for the ﬁrst
few values of m0 as a function of a/rg. We see, that for a broad range of a/rg this ratio changes
between ∼ 10−12 and ∼ 10−9. Note that for a/rg close to one the non-relativistic approximation is
not accurate for the l = m0 − 1 level. Comparing with the numerical results of [30] for m0 = 1, 2
suggests that the ratio |Γ1/Γ2| is actually close to 10−9 at a/rg close to one, rather than to 10−8
as shown in Fig. 9.

By comparing (53) and (48), we conclude that a large occupation number for one of the
superradiant levels may indeed strongly inhibit the development of superradiance for other levels
even in the regime when non-linearities are still irrelevant for the shape of the cloud.

Importantly, this does not happen for the most occupied level itself—this corresponds to
considering δw = δm = 0 in (51). The derivation of the horizon ﬂux (6) did not assume that
the ﬁeld is linear, so that as soon as the ﬁeld is well approximated by a single exponent ψ0 ∝
e−i(ω0t−m0ϕ) the superradiance will continue even in the non-linear regime.

It is important for this argument that the ansatz ψ0 ∝ e−i(ω0t−m0ϕ) is a consistent solution
of the Gross–Pitaevskii equation at the non-linear level. This is no longer true if one considers
the full scalar equation including all relativistic corrections—the higher harmonics get generated.
However, we do not expect those to change the conclusion. As shown in section 3.1, relativistic
processes are strongly suppressed for superradiant levels. Still, this point deserves further study.

28

Figure 9: Ratios of the superradiance rate for the (l + 1) level to the absorption rate for (l − 1)
level if the l level has a vanishing imaginary part for l = 1, 2, 3.

Note, that the eﬀects discussed so far—deformation of the shape of the cloud and shutdown
of superradiance due to level mixing—in principle could be caused by gravitational backreaction
of the cloud as well. We did not discuss them in section 3.1, because the shape deformation is
always small as soon as Ma (cid:28) MBH, and the level mixing is absent in the non-relativistic limit
when the density of axions ρa ≈ µaψ∗ψ does not depend on the azimuthal angle ϕ, as the cloud
is dominated by a single level. Consequently, these gravitational eﬀects are likely to be always
subdominant with respect to those caused by axion self-interactions.

Conversely, axion self-interactions may cause eﬀects similar to those discussed in section 3.1,
annihilations and elastic scatterings of axions. The leading annihilation process is annihilation
of three axions from the cloud into one axion in the continuum. Given that the outgoing axion
has energy of order 3µa, in the leading approximation it can be considered as massless, and the
calculation of the emission rate can be done similar to the graviton case. The analogue of (36) for
three axion annihilation in the massless approximation reads

dP
sin θdθdϕ

= 2ω2|j(ω, k)|2 ,

(54)

where

j(ω, k) ≡

(cid:90)

1
4π

µ2
a
6f 2
a

d3xφ3(ω, x)e−ikx .

29

0.40.50.60.70.80.91.010(cid:45)1310(cid:45)1210(cid:45)1110(cid:45)1010(cid:45)9BlackHoleSpina(cid:144)rg(cid:200)(cid:71)m(cid:43)1(cid:71)m(cid:45)1(cid:200)l(cid:61)m(cid:61)3l(cid:61)m(cid:61)2l(cid:61)m(cid:61)1Then a straightforward calculation gives the following result for the annihilation of three axions
from the l = m = 1 level into a single unbound axion,

dP
sin θdθdϕ

(3 × 1p → continuum) ≈ N 3

210α23
g(4 + α2)10 sin6 θ .

310f 4

a π3r6

(55)

To compare the eﬃciency of this process to the one graviton annihilation (44), let us integrate
over the angles in both cases to calculate the total emitted power and take the ratio. We get

P (3 × 1p → continuum)
P (2 × 1p → graviton)

≈ 10−2α4 Ma
MBH

M 4
P l
f 4
a

,

(56)

so that self-interactions dominate when the size of the cloud is not too small, however, as the cloud
decreases, the two axion annihilation into gravitons takes over. For instance, it will typically be
more important when the cloud size approaches the value in (53).

Just as in the case of graviton emission one may look for the processes that conserve axion
number and as a result may be less suppressed by powers of the small axion velocity in the cloud.
An obvious candidate process is an elastic two-to-two scattering of axions. However, it appears
likely that such processes are not important. The reason is that for the two-to-two scattering to
be unsuppressed, three of the participating axions should correspond to highly occupied levels.
As we will discuss in section 4, typically at any given moment of time only few of the levels are
signiﬁcantly occupied, and usually there is one which dominates the cloud. Then the most likely
candidate for the scattering process is a scattering when two axions from the most populated level
scatter, and one goes down to another highly populated level, while the remaining axion ﬂies out
in the continuum. For this scattering to be compatible with the energy conservation one needs

2
¯n2
1

<

1
¯n2
2

,

where n1 and n2 are the principal quantum numbers of the high- and low-lying levels, respectively.
The discussion of the superradiance development in the next section implies that the situation
where two levels satisfying this condition simultaneously have large occupation numbers is hardly
possible.

Note that throughout most of the discussion of axion self-interactions and gravitational wave
emission we treated axions in the cloud as free particles with hydrogen wave-functions, while
strictly speaking the elementary excitations of the axion BEC are Bogoliubov quasiparticles (51).
The free particle approximation is accurate when the mass of the cloud is small, so that the
eﬀects of self-interactions are weak, but may be misleading when the mass of the cloud is close
to saturating the bound (48). Unfortunately, it’s hard to improve on this approximation without
going into numerical simulations of the cloud, which are beyond the scope of our paper. We
proceed under assumption that the free particle approximation is a reliable guide for an order
of magnitude estimates at the masses close to saturating the bound (48) as well. The level
mixing phenomenon described above provides an important example of a situation, when the free
particle approximation is not adequate even at very small masses of the cloud. There is a clear
physical reason why this happens—some of the levels have damping rates orders of magnitude

30

faster than the population rates for the relevant superradiant levels, so even a tiny level mixing
qualitatively changes the dynamics. Fortunately, this eﬀect is straightforward to take into account
perturbatively, as we did.

To summarize, this discussion implies that self-interaction eﬀects cause a strong inﬂuence on
the phenomenology of superradiance. The proper taking into account of these eﬀects is one of the
major challenges for obtaining an accurate quantitative description of superradiance development.
The estimates presented here are far from being a complete accurate treatment and it appears
likely that numerical simulations are required to really solve the problem. It is worth mentioning
that level mixing can also be caused by the accretion disk of the black hole or a massive object
orbiting the black hole but we have already shown in [1] that these can be safely ignored. We
proceed now with estimating the possible observational signals of superradiance.

4 Observational signatures

Now that we are well equipped with the details of how superradiance works, let us put them
together and develop an intuition about the way superradiance develops in realistic environments
and about the observational signatures we may expect from this process under various circum-
stances. The full treatment of the set of kinetic equations describing superradiance (28), (70), (72)
appears to be quite challenging, given that a large number of competing processes with drastically
varying time scales is involved. Our strategy will be to start with a highly idealized situation
including a minimal number of dynamical ingredients and then keep adding more processes to get
closer to a realistic description. We already presented the list of possible observational signatures
of superradiance in the Introduction. Clearly, following the above strategy the very ﬁrst signa-
ture to discuss is the absence of rapidly rotating black holes of size matching the axion Compton
wavelength—the black hole spin-down is the most direct consequence of superradiance.

4.1 Black hole Regge trajectories

To get a rough idea of the bound on the axion mass that could come from black hole spin
measurements, we present in Fig. 2 regions in the black hole mass vs axion mass plane where the
superradiance timescale for a maximally rotating black hole is shorter than the age of the Universe
and the Eddington accretion time. We used the superradiance rates of section 2 to produce this
plot. For superradiance to have a non-negligible eﬀect on the black hole spin the process should
last for many e-foldings for the produced axions to carry away a noticeable fraction of the black
hole spin. To estimate the required number of e-foldings, note that, approximately,

MBH
µa

=

MBHrg
α

∼ 1076

(cid:19)2

(cid:18) MBH
M(cid:12)

(57)

of axions need to be produced for their total mass (spin) to be of order the black hole mass (spin).
This requires ∼ 102 e-foldings of superradiance; we took this factor into account in Fig. 2, by
presenting the region where the age of the Universe (or Eddington accretion) time is longer than
hundred superradiance times. We see from the plot that, as the black hole mass grows, the size

31

of the interval in axion mass which the black hole can in principle probe shrinks, because the
superradiance time gets longer.

This plot is useful as a zeroth order estimate, but cannot be used to deduce limits on axions
from data on existing black holes, since the black holes being observed do not all have spins close
to the maximum. Instead, we need to know the regions in the black hole “Regge” plot, the spin vs
mass plane for black holes, where we do not expect to ﬁnd black holes if an axion with a certain
mass exists, as shown in Fig. 3. The intricate structure of these plots is a manifestation of level
quantization in the superradiant gravitational atom, and their underlying physics is explained in
what follows.

To start with, let us ignore accretion and consider a black hole that starts oﬀ as maximally
rotating. This approximation should be physically relevant for stellar mass black holes produced
as a result of a fast catastrophic event, such as the supernovae explosion. Deviations from spherical
and axial symmetry are believed to be crucial for supernovae explosions, so there should be a lot
of angular momentum available when the black hole forms, and one may expect high initial values
for the black hole spin—as soon as the supernovae core gets rid of all the angular momentum
above the extremal value it collapses and forms a rapidly rotating black hole. This expectation
seems to be supported by observations—for instance, the high value of the spin-to-mass ratio
a
−0.07 deduced [40] for the black hole primary in the extragalactic X-ray binary LMC X-1
rg
is hard to reconcile with the young age (∼ 5 · 106 yr) of the system, if the spin were not natal.

≈ 0.92+0.05

For concreteness, we assume that the parameter α for the black hole is small, α (cid:46) 1/2, so
initially the fastest superradiant level is the 2p level with l = m = 1. Then, initially one can
ignore all the levels apart from the 2p superradiant level. It is straightforward to generalize all the
discussion below to smaller initial values of the black hole spin and larger values of α. The black
hole will start to lose its spin rapidly by populating this level. The time scale for this process can
be really fast—from section 2 we know that the superradiance rate can be as fast as 107r−1
g , which
corresponds to 102 seconds for a two solar mass black hole. However, there is a critical value of the
black hole spin a1(α)/rg, at which the superradiant condition (3) ceases to hold for the l = m = 1
level, so the width of this level becomes zero and the spin-down process terminates.

Let us for a moment consider the case where the axion self-interactions are absent, as if we
were dealing with a free massive ﬁeld rather than a (pseudo)Nambu-Goldstone boson. Then at
this point superradiance would continue by populating the second superradiant level l = m = 2
(3d) at a much longer time scale. Note, however, that for many e-foldings of superradiance the
black hole spin would remain approximately constant and equal to a1(α)/rg. Indeed, if the spin
would signiﬁcantly drop below this value the frequency of the 2p-level would acquire a negative
imaginary part, so that the black hole would start absorbing axions from the 2p-level and spinning
up back with a rate much faster than the population rate for the 3d level. Instead, the spin stays
practically constant close to a1(α)/rg as the black hole populates the 3d-level while being slowly
fed by axions from the 2p-level. When the occupation number for the latter level N2p drops below
Γ3d
|Γ2p| N3d the spin-up rate due to 2p-level cannot compete with the spin-down rate due to 2d-level
and the black hole spin further drops down till the value a2(α)/rg, where the superradiance rate
for the 3d-level turns zero and the story repeats this time involving the l = m = 3 (4f ) level.

Of course, from section 3 we know that this story cannot be an accurate description of what
actually happens—non-linearities related to the axion self-interactions and due to gravity cannot

32

be neglected in a realistic description of superradiance. However, the above simpliﬁed example
correctly captures the major important feature—during the spin-down black hole spin tends to
evolve rapidly till it reaches the line ai(α)/rg in the Regge plane where one of the superradiant
levels changes the sign (“Regge trajectory”), where it can get stuck for a quite long period of time.
In fact, as we will see momentarily, non-linear eﬀects make this behavior even more pronounced.
Indeed, as we discussed in section 3.2, even relatively small amount of axions populating one
superradiant level may shut down the instability for the next level. For instance, in the above
example, when the black hole reaches the ﬁrst Regge trajectory a1(α)/rg the 3d level does not
start being populated until a large enough number of axions dissipate from the 2p level, so that
its mass drops below the bound in (53).

We discussed two processes that reduce the number of axions in the superradiant cloud, anni-
hilations into gravitons and annihilations into unbound axions due to self-interactions. The latter
process is more eﬃcient at large occupation numbers. However, the annihilation rate drops down
as the number of axions decreases and, when the cloud mass approaches the bound (53), the
graviton annihilation, which involves only two axions, wins, as seen from (56). The total duration
of the annihilation period before superradiance restarts, is dominated by the latest stages of the
process. We can estimate the duration of this period by using the annihilation rates calculated
in section 3.1. The occupation number of axions dissipating from the cloud through annihilations
into gravitons satisﬁes the following equation

dN
dt

(2 × axion → graviton) ≡ −ΓannN 2 ,

(58)

where the coeﬃcient Γann can be deduced by integrating the annihilation rates, such as (44), over
the angles. By solving (58) we obtain that the occupation number evolves in time as

N (t) =

N (0)
1 + ΓannN (0)t

≈

1
Γannt

,

(59)

where at the last step we took the late time asymptotics. By using (53) we ﬁnd that the anni-
hilation time needed to clean the system before superradiance can continue to populate the next
level is

t ∼

α2µa
2l4MBHΓann

M 2
P l
f 2
a

1/2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Γ2
Γ1

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

≡ τ (α)

(cid:18) MBH
2M(cid:12)

(cid:19) (cid:18)M 2
P l
f 2
a

/104

(cid:19) (cid:18)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

Γ2
Γ1

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:19)1/2

/10−10

,

(60)

where the last step is merely the deﬁnition of the normalized annihilation time τ (α). In Fig. 10 we
present τ (α) for the ﬁrst three levels. We see that for stellar mass black holes, depending on the
parameters, there is enough time for annihilations to complete on one or two Regge trajectories.
The above discussion gives rise to the following picture of the black hole evolution under the
inﬂuence of superradiance. An initially fastly rotating black rapidly loses its spin and approaches
the closest Regge trajectory ai(α)/rg. Then, for a long time the black hole stays at this trajectory
while axions in the cloud keep annihilating. When the cloud mass drops below the critical value
(53) the superradiance becomes operative again and the black hole rapidly travels to the next
Regge trajectory. Consequently, in the region of the Regge plane aﬀected by superradiance masses
and spins of observed black holes should follow quantized trajectories.

33

Figure 10: The time required for the axion cloud around a 2M(cid:12) black hole to dissipate such that
the next superradiant level can start being populated for clouds with l = 1, 2, 3, 4.

During transitions between Regge trajectories another non-linear process discussed in sec-
tion 3.2—bosenova—becomes important. As the cloud mass during the transition grows above
(48) the cloud becomes unstable as a result of the attractive axion self-interactions and collapses.
The detailed analysis of this process requires numerical simulations, which are beyond our goals
in this paper. However, the most likely outcome seems to be that order one fraction of the cloud
gets absorbed by the black hole and order one becomes relativistic and escapes at the time scale
set by the size of the black hole. Condition (3) implies that to complete the transition to the next
Regge trajectory a black hole needs to release up to a few percent of its mass into axions. Conse-
quently, each transition proceeds through a sequence of tens to hundreds of Bosenova explosions
for fa ∼ MGU T . As discussed later, these explosions may give rise to the observable gravitational
wave signal for supermassive black holes and perhaps to the gamma ray signal for the QCD axion.
It is straightforward now to add accretion into this picture, at least at the qualitative level.
Under the inﬂuence of accretion, the black hole mass and spin will still stay on the Regge trajectory,
since the superradiance rate for the corresponding level is much faster than the accretion rate
away from the trajectory. Indeed, if accretion brings the black hole above the Regge trajectory,
the level acquires positive imaginary part and spins the black hole down back onto the trajectory.
Conversely, if as a result of accretion the black hole deviates below the Regge trajectory, the
imaginary part becomes negative and the black hole starts absorbing axions from the cloud to
return on the trajectory.

34

0.00.51.01.52.01001041061081010Μa(cid:180)rgTimeinyearstodepopulatealevelforMBH(cid:61)2(cid:180)Msolarl(cid:61)m(cid:61)4l(cid:61)m(cid:61)3l(cid:61)m(cid:61)2l(cid:61)m(cid:61)1Note that accretion may aﬀect the black hole transition rate between diﬀerent trajectories if
its rate is faster or comparable to the annihilation rate. If it consistently pushes black hole above
the trajectory, new axions will be coming to the cloud compensating the eﬀect of annihilations.
Conversely, by pushing the black hole below the trajectory, accretion may accelerate the dissipation
of the cloud.

Of course the above discussion only applies if accretion is slow compared to superradiance in
the vicinity of the Regge trajectory. We illustrated all of the above in Fig. 3. Here, lines of diﬀerent
colors correspond to diﬀerent levels. Parts of these lines where the spin increases with the mass are
boundaries of the superradiant region, where α = mw+(a/rg) for the corresponding values of m.
These are the Regge trajectories ai(α)/rg discussed above. For each trajectory the superradiance
time grows at small α, and at some point becomes longer than the age of the Universe. Then,
instead of showing the line where the width of the level is zero, we show the curve where the
superradiance time is equal to the age of the Universe. These are the parts of the lines in Fig. 3,
where the spin is a decreasing function of the mass. Below the solid line the superradiance time
is longer than the age of the Universe for all unstable levels.

To ﬁnish the discussion of the Regge trajectories, note that we started with considering an
example of the black hole spin-down, which can be relevant for stellar mass black holes, but by
now it is clear that also the evolution of the galactic black hole will follow the same rule—as the
black hole enters in the region of the Regge plane aﬀected by superradiance it starts moving there
along the Regge trajectories, occasionally experiencing rapid transitions between diﬀerent Regge
trajectories.

4.2 Gravitational waves

An even more direct possibility to detect the presence of an axion cloud around black holes is
to observe the associated gravitational wave signal. As we discussed in section 3.1 there are two
principal processes giving rise to gravitational waves from the cloud—axion transitions between
levels and axion annihilations. The bosenova collapse may also give rise to a burst of gravitational
waves.

Let us start with the transition signal. For transitions to be eﬃcient one needs large occupation
numbers for two diﬀerent levels to be present simultaneously to get a Bose enhancement of the
signal. Combined with non-linear eﬀects discussed in section 3.2 this practically singles out the
type of transitions having chances to be observed and the corresponding stages of the black hole
evolution2.

Indeed, in section 3.2 we found that even a relatively small amount of axions on the most
populated level shuts down the superradiance for levels with diﬀerent magnetic angular numbers
as a result of level mixing. Consequently, the only chance for two levels to grow together, and as a
result to acquire large occupation numbers simultaneously, is when the levels have equal angular
numbers m. This case corresponds to setting δm = 0 in (51); the mixing for such levels does not
change their magnetic number and does not shut down the superradiance.

2In particular, transitions between superradiant and non-superradiant levels, chosen as an illustrative example in
[1], are actually never important because the transition rate is always suppressed compared to the axion absorbtion
rate for non-superradiant levels and they never have a chance to acquire a large occupation number.

35

Furthermore, for two levels with equal magnetic numbers m but diﬀerent orbital momenta l
the superradiance rate for the more energetic level (the one with a higher l) is very much slower, so
that by the moment the black hole reaches the corresponding Regge trajectory by populating the
lower level, the occupation number for the higher level is tiny, and there is no signiﬁcant transition
signal.

All this lead us to consider the transition between two levels with diﬀerent principal quantum
numbers n, but equal l and m as the most promising source of an observable gravitational wave
signal. It is natural to consider the case, when the level with the larger principal number n has the
faster superradiance rate. As mentioned in section 2.1, the lowest l when such a situation takes
place is l = 4, so let’s pick this level as the simplest representative example. The corresponding
transition rate is given by (42). The amplitude of the gravitational wave signal at the detector is
related to the total power emitted as

h =

(cid:18) 4GP
r2ω2

(cid:19)1/2

,

(61)

where ω is the frequency of emitted gravitons and r is the distance to the source. By making use
of the rate (38) and plugging in the transition frequency (40) we obtain

h ∼ 10−22α2((cid:15)1(cid:15)0)1/2

(cid:18) 10 Mpc
r

(cid:19) (cid:18)MBH
2M(cid:12)

(cid:19)

,

(62)

where (cid:15)1,0 are total masses of axions populating the n = 1 and n = 0 levels, in units of the black
hole mass,

(cid:15)1,0 =

Ma1,0
MBH

and the frequency of the signal ν is determined by the axion and black hole masses as

ν ≈ 100 Hz α3

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 2M(cid:12)
MBH

.

(63)

For annihilations one needs fewer conditions to be satisﬁed to get a signiﬁcant signal—the
occupation number for only one of the levels has to be large. As we discussed in section 3.1 the
annihilation rates for diﬀerent levels are rather similar at same values of α/l, so let us consider
the l = 1 level as a representative example. The annihilation rate (44) gives rise to a gravitational
wave signal of strength equal to

h ∼ 10−22α7(cid:15)

(cid:18) 10 Mpc
r

(cid:19) (cid:18)MBH
2M(cid:12)

(cid:19)

,

(64)

where, as before, (cid:15) is the fraction of the black hole mass accumulated in the cloud. The frequency
ν for this signal is given by

ν ≈ 30 kHz α

.

(65)

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 2M(cid:12)
MBH

The numbers in (62) and (64) deﬁnitely appear interesting both at high frequencies probed by
Advanced LIGO and corresponding to stellar mass black holes and when scaled down to low LISA

36

frequencies, corresponding to supermassive galactic black holes. However, to judge the chances
to observe these signals we need to estimate the fractional mass of the cloud, (cid:15), in (62) and (64),
that will determine the possible observational reach in terms of the distance to the source.

To make these estimates note that, as we discussed, a large fraction of its time the black hole
spends on the Regge trajectories with a relatively small axion cloud around, down to (cid:15) ∼ 10−12÷10,
waiting for the cloud to be dissipated so that the next level can start being populated triggering
a relatively fast transition to the next Regge trajectory. Transitions between diﬀerent trajectories
and relatively short time intervals afterwards, when (cid:15) can be signiﬁcantly larger, provide the most
promising periods for an observable gravitational wave signal. Every black hole may experience
several such transitions—one directly after the black hole formation, another one or two after
periods of axion annihilations and possibly more triggered by accretion or merger events.

From (3) we can estimate the total spin, and, as a consequence, the mass extracted from the
black hole during such transitions. The latter typically turns out to be around a percent of the
black hole mass. However, the main limiting factor for the size of the cloud is the Bosenova
instability that prevents the cloud mass to grow above 10−4 ÷ 10−3 of the black hole mass. This is
enough to estimate the strength of the annihilation signal. In Fig. 11 we present the contour plot
for the strength of the signal in the black axion mass vs α plane from axion annihilations in the
l = 1 level, assuming the size of the cloud (cid:15) = 10−4. We pick 20 Mpc as the distance to the source
(which is the distance to the Virgo supercluster, containing about 2000 galaxies), and choose
106 seconds as a coherent integration time for the signal. Note that existing spin measurements
(Fig. 3) suggest a lower bound of µa (cid:38) 3 · 10−11 eV for axions matching the size of stellar mass
black holes (which would correspond to α (cid:38) 0.9 for 2M(cid:12) black hole), pushing the annihilation
signal for Advanced LIGO into a range of somewhat uncomfortably large frequencies.

Predicting the characteristic features of the transition signal is more involved and requires a
detailed quantitative analysis of the dynamics, but some simple estimates can still be done. Let
us focus on the simplest case of the 6g → 5g transition. To describe the evolution of the cloud
during the transition to the l = 4 Regge trajectory, let us truncate the system (28) by keeping
only 6g and 5g levels and ignore accretion. Then we obtain the following pair of equations for the
relative sizes of the 6g and 5g components of the cloud,

d(cid:15)0
dt
d(cid:15)1
dt

= Γ440(cid:15)0 − Γt(cid:15)1(cid:15)0

= Γ441(cid:15)1 + Γt(cid:15)1(cid:15)0 ,

(66)

where Γ440, Γ441 are the superradiance rates, and the transition coeﬃcient Γt is determined from
(42) to be equal to

Γt ≈ 3 · 10−7 α8
rg

.

We neglected the annihilation processes which are slow compared to superradiance and transitions.
As follows from Fig. 5 the superradiance rates Γ440, Γ441 are of order 10−10r−1
for α ∼ 1. Using
the small α approximation (18) as a guide, their ratio can be estimated as Γ440/Γ441 ∼ 0.9.

g

Let us focus on the case of α ∼ 1. Then the dynamics following from equations (66) is quite
simple. Both levels start being populated but the lower one has a smaller superradiance rate, and

37

Figure 11: The contour plot of constant gravitational wave signal from axion annihilations in
the 2p level for a black hole located at 20 Mpc away from the Earth. The projected sensitivity
curves assume 106 seconds of a coherent integration time for LISA [41], AGIS, Advanced LIGO
and Einstein Telescope.

as a consequence is less occupied. By the time the occupation number of the 6g level reaches its
maximum, (cid:15)1 ∼ 10−4÷3, the occupation of the lower 5g level is given by

(cid:15)0 ≈ (cid:15)1e−0.1Ne ,

where Ne the number of e-foldings of superradiance required to populate the 6g level. The number
of e-foldings depends on the initial number of axions. As follows from (57) it varies from Ne ∼ 165
if initially the 5g level is not occupied, down to Ne ∼ 100 if we estimate the initial occupation
number to be determined by the dark matter density. In fact, the initial axion number can be
signiﬁcantly larger, if we consider a transition after a recent Bosenova event.

Even though (cid:15)0 is exponentially sensitive to Ne this uncertainty does not pose a big problem
for estimating the gravitational wave signal at its maximum. Indeed, even if we set (cid:15)0 = (cid:15)1, the

38

EinsteinTelescopeAdvancedLIGOAGISLISA10(cid:45)3210(cid:45)3110(cid:45)3010(cid:45)2910(cid:45)2810(cid:45)2710(cid:45)2610(cid:45)2510(cid:45)2410(cid:45)2310(cid:45)2210(cid:45)2110(cid:45)2010(cid:45)19(cid:45)20(cid:45)18(cid:45)16(cid:45)14(cid:45)12(cid:45)100.200.250.300.350.400.450.501086420AxionmassinLog10ΜaeVΜa(cid:180)rgBlackHoleMassinLog10MBHMsolarforΜa(cid:180)rg(cid:61)1Figure 12: The contour plot of constant gravitational wave signal from axion transitions between
the 6g and the 5g levels for a black hole located at 20 Mpc away from the Earth. The projected
sensitivity curves assume 104 seconds of a coherent integration time.

transition terms in (66) are still too small to compete with the superradiance upto (cid:15)1 ∼ 10−4,
so that this uncertainty does not aﬀect the dynamics. Also, to estimate the maximal possible
signal let us concentrate on the very last episode of spinning down which is terminated because
the black hole reaches the l = 4 Regge trajectory (and not by the Bosenova event, as happens
for earlier episodes of spindown). At the end of this episode superradiance shuts down and only
the transition terms in (66) are left. At this point the (cid:15)0/(cid:15)1 ratio is small, but it starts growing
as a result of transitions. The transition signal reaches its maximum when (cid:15)0 ∼ (cid:15)1 ∼ 10−4 and
then decreases because the occupation fraction (cid:15)1 for the 6g-level drops down. The duration of
the signal at peak intensity is determined by the transition rate and is of order

which is of order a day for a stellar mass black hole with α ∼ 1 and (cid:15)0 ∼ 10−4.

t(6g → 5g) ∼ 3 · 106 rg
α8(cid:15)0

,

39

EinsteinTelescopeAdvancedLIGOAGISLISA10(cid:45)2710(cid:45)2610(cid:45)2510(cid:45)2410(cid:45)2310(cid:45)2210(cid:45)2110(cid:45)2010(cid:45)1910(cid:45)18(cid:45)18(cid:45)16(cid:45)14(cid:45)12(cid:45)100.60.81.01.21.41.61.886420AxionmassinLog10ΜaeVΜa(cid:180)rgBlackHoleMassinLog10MBHMsolarforΜa(cid:180)rg(cid:61)1In Fig. 12 we present the contour plot for the gravitational wave amplitude as determined
by (62) for diﬀerent axion masses and values of α (equivalently, for diﬀerent black hole masses),
assuming (cid:15)1 = (cid:15)0 = 10−4 and taking 20 Mpc as a distance to the source. We presented also the sen-
sitivity curves of various planned gravitational wave detectors assuming the coherent integration
time 104 seconds.

We see that future experiments will be sensitive to the transition signal from the superradiant
cloud over a large range of axion and black hole masses. What is especially exciting is that the
Advanced LIGO detector which is scheduled to start operating around 2014 will be probing the
heavy mass regime for axions, in particular the QCD axion. We will discuss the Advanced LIGO
reach for the QCD axion in more details in section 4.4.

Finally, as we already said, as a consequence of Bosenova, every transition between Regge tra-
jectories goes through a series of 10-100 spin-down episodes interrupted by silent intervals needed
to build up the cloud. Depending on the distance to the source one may see also gravitational
wave signal from the earlier episodes, although to study this possibility requires a more detailed
analysis of the dynamics (in particular, accurate prediction of the e-folding number Ne). If these
signals can be observed, then by measuring the frequency and the amplitude of the signal as well
as the duration of the active and silent intervals one may hope to extract not only the mass of the
axion, but to estimate the scale fa as well.

Also the Bosenova event by itself gives rise to a gravitational wave burst. Assuming that the
collapse of the cloud happens on a time scale of order rg the power emitted in gravitational waves
during the Bosenova event can be estimated as

PBN ∼ GN (cid:15)2M 2

BHr−2
g

,

which translates into the gravitational wave amplitude at the Earth of order

h ∼ (cid:15)

rg
r

∼ 10−17 (cid:16) (cid:15)
10−4

(cid:17) (cid:18) MBH
108M(cid:12)

(cid:19) (cid:18)100 Mpc

(cid:19)

r

,

with the frequency being of order r−1

g . This signal may be observable for supermassive black holes.
To conclude, let us emphasize that in estimating the signal strength we were using the free
particle approximation for axions all the way up to (cid:15) ∼ 10−4, when the bound (51) gets saturated
and this approximation may be not adequate, as we already discussed. This may be especially
important for the transition signal where one needs to follow several levels simultaneously. Conse-
quently, our encouraging estimates here should be considered as a strong motivation for a further
careful numerical analysis of the system, rather than as an accurate prediction for the signal.

4.3 Direct observation of the cloud

Another potential observational consequence of superradiance is the presence of the cloud itself,
which could be directly detected by precision mapping of the near horizon black hole metric. Such
a mapping will be made possible by future low frequency gravitational wave detectors, such as
LISA or AGIS, during the last stages of the inspiral of a compact object (black hole/neutron
star/white dwarf) into a supermassive black hole. With LISA sensitivities, it will be possible to

40

observe hundreds of such events per year for diﬀerent galaxies, and to trace up to ∼ 105 orbits in
an individual event. This will allow mass and spin determination with 10−5 accuracy, and about
6-7 higher multipole moments of the metric can be measured with better than a few percent
precision.

In principle, it is straightforward to calculate the modiﬁcation to the waveform of the inspiral
signal due to the presence of the axion cloud. In the regime when non-linearities can be neglected
(and this is the only regime, where the cloud can stay for a cosmologically long time) the shape of
the cloud is determined by the well-known wave functions of the hydrogen atom. It is likely that
the best chances to observe the presence of the cloud are for black holes with moderately small
values of α/l. Indeed, at smaller values of α non-linear eﬀects and processes leading to dissipation
of axions from the cloud get suppressed allowing for longer lifetimes and a larger cloud mass. On
the other hand, the size of the cloud grows at small α and the total mass becomes smaller for the
same value of the spin (“the balerina eﬀect”), making it challenging to see the eﬀect of the cloud
at too small values of α. A dedicated study is required to ﬁnd the optimal value of α and to see
whether the eﬀect is observable.

Another subtlety with using gravitational wave signal from compact inspirals to detect the
presence of the cloud is that the non-spherical metric perturbation induced by an infalling compact
object may be strong enough to cause a mixing between superradiant and non-superradiant levels
and induce the disappearance of the cloud, similar to the eﬀect of axion self-interactions.

To summarize, directly probing the structure of the cloud with extreme mass ratio inspirals
is an interesting possibility awaiting for a dedicated theoretical study to decide on whether it is
feasible. Another possibility worth exploring are the eﬀects of the cloud on the accretion disk of
stellar mass black holes. In this case, the cloud could excite resonant modes of the accretion disk,
the so called quasi-periodic oscillations.

4.4 The QCD axion and superradiance

The QCD axion is the best motivated of all axion-like particles and by itself serves as one of the
major motivations for the whole axiverse framework, so let us summarize here what range of its
parameter space will be probed by on-going and future black hole observations.

Unlike for other axions, the QCD axion mass µa and decay constant fa are related to each
other by (2). Furthermore, non-perturbative string corrections to the QCD axion potential take
the form

Vstring (cid:39) Λ4e−S cos φ/fa ,

where the energy scale Λ is either Planck or string scale (in exceptional cases it might be sup-
pressed by the SUSY breaking scale, Λ4 ∼ M 2
P lFSU SY [21]) and the instanton action S in explicit
constructions is bounded from above as

S (cid:46) MP l
fa

.

(67)

S is close to saturating the above bound if a compactiﬁcation manifold is neither too anisotropic
nor strongly warped. It was suggested [42] that the upper bound (67) follows from very general

41

properties of quantum gravity. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no speciﬁc proposal
for the exact numerical coeﬃcient that should appear in a conjectured sharp version of (67).

To solve the strong CP problem the instanton action should be suﬃciently large, S (cid:38) 200.
Combined with the above arguments this suggests that the scale fa for the QCD axion is unlikely
to be signiﬁcantly higher than f ew × 1016 GeV or equivalently, that the QCD axion mass is
unlikely to be signiﬁcantly lighter than 10−10 eV. Also, from a bottom-up perspective, the values
of fa close to the grand uniﬁcation scale, corresponding to masses ma ∼ 3 · 10−10 eV, appear to
be well-motivated.

4.4.1 Black hole spindown and Advanced LIGO

These arguments motivate thinking of the consequences of superradiance in an axion mass range
that is as heavy as possible while still aﬀecting black hole dynamics. Of course, from a purely
phenomenological approach any limit on the QCD axion parameters in the high fa regime are
still extremely interesting. The current measurements of black hole masses and spins, presented
in Fig. 3, already suggest an upper bound on the axion decay constant at the level

fa (cid:46) 2 · 1017 GeV .

(68)

For higher values of the decay constant, i. e. lighter axion mass, the gap in the upper panel of
Fig. 3 would shift towards heavier black hole masses and would contain rapidly spinning black
holes inside. Of course, at the moment one should consider this bound as indicative. First, the
data points in Fig. 3 may be subject to signiﬁcant systematic uncertainties. For instance, the
highest spin black hole in Fig. 3 is GRS 1915+105, and the model for the soft X-ray spectrum
of this object suggests a much smaller value of the spin a/rg ≈ 0.56 [6], than the one presented
here (from [5]). Second, rapidly spinning black holes in Fig. 3 may turn out to be young enough
to stay in the gap region—for instance, the age of the second fastest spinning black hole in Fig. 3
(LMC X-1) is quite short—of order 5 million years [40].

All these uncertainties will get rectiﬁed with more data coming. Given that a black hole
produced as a result of the stellar collapse can be as light as ∼ 2M(cid:12), spin measurements alone
can potentially improve the bound (68) by a factor of few. Still, the above theoretical arguments
suggest that it may be not enough to discover the QCD axion. A plausible situation could be
that the QCD axion is light enough to aﬀect the dynamics of the lightest stellar mass black hole
through superradiance, but is still too heavy to produce a noticeable gap in the spectrum of
rapidly rotating black holes. This makes it especially important to study other consequences of
superradiance that may allow to discover the QCD axion in such a situation.

One exciting possibility to discover the QCD axion is through observing of the gravitational
wave signal from superradiating black holes at Advanced LIGO, as discussed in section 4.2. Es-
timates presented there indicate that Advanced LIGO may see the transition signal for the QCD
axion, although the annihilation signal will probably have too large frequency to be observed at
that experiment. As we mentioned, details of the transition signal—such as the strength of the
signal at the maximum intensity—may even provide an estimate for the decay constant, which
would be a further conﬁrmation that the signal is related to the QCD axion, rather than to some
other axion-like particle. In Fig. 4 we zoomed in the high mass region of the plot in Fig. 12 relevant

42

for the QCD axion. This plot shows only the estimated signal for the 6g → 5g transitions. For
heavy axions the higher l levels are likely to be relevant; our estimates show that the corresponding
signal is very similar to the one in Fig. 4. Note that we pick 104 second as a coherent integration
time for this plot, so that the actual reach can be even better for longer integration times. We
see that Advanced LIGO has the potential to probe the most interesting mass range for the QCD
axion, and this is even more true for the Einstein telescope.

Coming to other probes, unfortunately, it is impossible to use gravitational waves to probe
the shape of the QCD axion cloud around stellar mass black holes as it could be done for lighter
axions aﬀecting supermassive black holes. However, it is interesting to study whether the QCD
axion cloud may resonantly excite certain characteristic perturbations in the accretion disc that
would signal about the presence of the cloud.

4.4.2 Photon signals: radio waves, γ- and X-rays

Finally, there could be QCD axion speciﬁc signatures related to the direct coupling of the QCD
axion to Standard Model ﬁelds. First, there is a coupling (30) to photons. As we already discussed
this coupling converts axions from the superradiant cloud into photon with the rate given by (31).
This conversion rate is too slow to aﬀect the dynamics of superradiance, but it may still provide
an observable signal on Earth. The photons in question are almost monochromatic radio waves,
and the production rate (31) translates in the following ﬂux at Earth,

Fradio ∼ 10−14 W
m2

(cid:18) 1016 GeV
fa

(cid:19)2 (cid:16) (cid:15)

(cid:17) (cid:18)

10−4

B
108 Gauss

(cid:19)2 (cid:18) 1 kpc

(cid:19)2

r

.

There are several challenges for this signal to be observable, and they all arise because the frequency
of the signal is equal to the axion mass, and corresponds to radio waves with wavelengths of order
at least few hundred meters. The ﬁrst diﬃculty arrises because these wavelengths cannot be
observed on the Earth’s surface, since the ionosphere is not transparent for radio waves at these
low frequencies. However, this problem may be solved by using space- (or Moon-) based radio
telescopes. The major challenge, however, is that the electron density around a black hole should
be quite small, ne (cid:46) 100 cm−3, for the signal to be able to escape from the source. It is very
hard to ﬁnd a source satisfying this property, given that one needs substantial magnetic ﬁeld in
the vicinity of the cloud for eﬃcient axion-to-photon conversion. This possibility will be studied
in [43].

Probably a more promising possibility is related to the coupling (1) of the QCD axion to
the QCD instanton number. To observe the consequences of this coupling would be especially
interesting given that the interaction (1) is a genuine footprint of the QCD axion. An intriguing
possibility to achieve this is related to the following observation. As follows from the estimate
(47) the axion ﬁeld in the cloud may reach values of order

φ ∼ 2

α
l

fa ,

(69)

i.e., the ratio φ/fa becomes of order one. For the QCD axion this ratio is nothing else as but the
local value of the CP violating θ-parameter in the QCD. QCD properties are rather diﬀerent at

43

large values of the θ-parameter—for instance, the pion mass is smaller by a factor of order 3 at
θ = π as compared to the θ ≈ 0 vacuum, where we live (see, e.g., [44] for a recent discussion).
Given that (multi)pion exchange is one of the dominant forces responsible for the nuclear binding
it is natural to expect that nuclear binding energies change by order one in the regions with θ ∼ 13.
Consequently, it is natural to speculate that some of the stable nuclei may become unstable
towards disintegration, and gamma- or beta-decay when they enter in the region of the cloud as it
approaches the maximum size. Even if (47) somewhat overestimates the maximum θ in the cloud,
it appears very probable that θ becomes of order one at least during the Bosenova events. The
characteristic timescale for the latter is set by the black hole size and is of order 10−5 seconds.
Consequently, it’s only strong and electromagnetic nuclear instabilities that have enough time to
be important during the Bosenova event.

Under the optimistic assumption that an order one fraction of nuclei in the vicinity of the black
hole horizon decays and produces γ-quanta with MeV energies let us estimate the resulting ﬂux
of photons at the Earth from the Bosenova event. If the black hole accretes with an Eddington
limited rate, the total amount of matter within a distance of order rg from the black hole horizon
can be estimated as MBHrg/τE ∼ 1035 GeV∼ 10−22M(cid:12), where τE is the Eddington time (33).
This may give rise to the emission of order 1035 photons with MeV energies on a time-scale of
order 10−5 seconds. This is not very much—for a black hole at 10 pc away one would obtain one
photon per 10 m2 at the Earth. However, there are several ways the signal can be signiﬁcantly
stronger. First, the major limiting factor in the above estimate is the amount of matter in the
vicinity of the black hole horizon. This amount may be roughly 22 orders of magnitude larger
immediately after the supernova explosion. Of course, this is a violent event providing lots of
radiation by itself, and also immediately after the explosion the metric perturbation due to the
surrounding matter is likely to be strong enough to damp the superradiance. However after the
environment cleans up a bit this may give rise to a signal many orders of magnitude stronger than
in the Eddington regime.

Also the signal may last signiﬁcantly longer if, as the estimate (69) suggests, nuclei may get
destabilized not only during the Bosenova collapse, but also when the cloud is still stable. Another
possibility for the signal to last longer is for the Bosenova to produce long-lived axion clumps (such
as “pulsons” of [45]) that would be able to escape from the near-horizon region.

Finally, rather than directly detecting photons one may look for spectral X-ray lines of exotic
elements in the vicinity of the black hole, that could have been formed as a result of the nuclear
disintegration triggered by the large axion ﬁeld4.

4.5 Accelerated growth of black holes

Yet another indirect consequence of superradiance is that axions, if present, would accelerate the
black hole growth. As a toy illustrative example we pick the Eddington saturated thin disc model
(see [46] for a review and references). In this model the black hole mass evolves according to
1 − (cid:15)M (¯a)
(cid:15)M (¯a)

+ ˙Msr ,

dM
dt

M
τE

(70)

=

3Note, that this eﬀect was not taken into account in the analysis of [44].
4We thank Steve Kahn for pointing this out.

44

Figure 13: Kinetic coeﬃcients determining the black hole mass (solid line) and spin (dashed line)
growth during Eddington limited accretion.

where, the accreting gas is assumed to have zero metallicity, τE is given by (33), and (cid:15)M (¯a) is
the radiation eﬃciency for the accrettion—the fraction of the incoming energy that gets radiated
away in the process of accretion. It depends only on the dimensionless spin-to-mass ratio

¯a ≡

a
rg

,

and in Fig. 13 we have shown the coeﬃcient (1 − (cid:15)M )/(cid:15)M appearing in (70) as a function of ¯a.
Finally, the ˙Msr-term accounts for superradiance, and is given by

˙Msr = −µa

(cid:88)

i

ΓiNi + . . . ,

(71)

where the omitted terms are those related to non-linear eﬀects.

The time evolution of the black hole spin in the thin disc model is determined by the following

equation

s(¯a)
(cid:15)M (¯a)τE
where the ratio s/(cid:15)M as a function of ¯a is also shown in Fig. 13. As before, the ˙¯asr-term describes

+ ˙¯asr ,

d¯a
dt

(72)

=

45

0.00.20.40.60.81.00102030405060BlackHoleSpina(cid:144)rgKineticCoefficientsΕM(cid:72)1(cid:45)ΕM(cid:76)ΕMFigure 14: The eﬀect of an axion on the black hole growth history for the simplest thin disc
Eddington limited accretion (lower curves) and for a more realistic model thin disc model of
Eddington accretion taking into account result of magnetohydrodynamical simulations (details of
both models can be found in [47]).

the eﬀects of superradiance and is equal to

˙¯asr = −

µa
M

(cid:88)

(α−1mi − 2¯a)ΓiNi .

i

(73)

Fig. 13 now makes the eﬀect of superradiance evident: the solid line there indicates that the
mass of a slowly rotating black hole accreting in the Eddington regime grows almost an order of
magnitude faster than the mass of a rapidly rotating black hole.

The origin of this eﬀect is easy to understand. For a rapidly rotating Kerr black hole the size of
the last stable orbit is signiﬁcantly smaller than for a Schwarzschild black hole of the same mass.
As a result the accreting plasma radiates a larger fraction of its rest mass before falling into a
rotating black hole. In the Eddington saturated regime the radiation pressure is the main limiting
factor for the accretion rate—hence, the accretion proceeds faster for a Schwarzschild black hole,
as the solid line in Fig. 13 shows.

The dashed line in Fig. 13 indicates that a black hole accreting in the Eddington regime
rapidly spins up and keeps growing with a high value of spin. Instead, if a black hole is aﬀected
by superradiance it follows the Regge trajectory, where its spin can be signiﬁcantly lower and, as
a consequence, the growth rate is much faster. Given that even a single axion aﬀects a large range

46

0.51.01.52.02.53.03.51041051061071081091010TimeinunitsofΤEddingtonBlackHoleMassinunitsofMSolarof black hole masses, superradiance may signiﬁcantly aﬀect the growth history of supermassive
black holes, as illustrated in Fig. 14.

It is worth noting that quasars hosting ∼ 109 M(cid:12) black holes were observed at as high redshifts
as z = 6.43, and some authors think that these observations may present a challenge for the
conventional story of black hole growth [47]. Of course, the actual dynamics describing black hole
evolution is likely to be signiﬁcantly more complicted with merger events playing a signiﬁcant
role (see, e.g., [48] for a recent overview), and it is premature to decide whether any new physics,
such as axions, is needed to explain the existing observations. However, it is likely that with
future X-ray and gravitational wave data as well as with a progress in numerical simulations the
evolution history of supermassive black holes will be understood much better, and new physics
might eventually be required, especially if quasars with signiﬁcantly higher redshifts are to be
discovered. At any rate, even if a conventional astrophysics is able to explain the data, it is useful
to keep in mind that axions, if present, are able to signiﬁcantly aﬀect the story.

5 Bookkeeping of anthropic axions

Before concluding, let us elaborate on one particularly interesting feature of axions in the mass
range relevant for the present paper, µa (cid:38) 10−21 eV and with a high symmetry breaking scale,
fa ∼ MGU T . Namely, the axion abundance relative to baryons is given by5,

Ωa
Ωb

(cid:39) 5γP (θa)

(cid:16)

µa
2.4 · 10−19 eV

(cid:17)1/2 (cid:18)

fa
2 · 1016 GeV

(cid:19)4

,

(74)

where γ is an order one coeﬃcient diﬀerent from unity if an axion is heavy enough, so that the
eﬀective number of degrees of freedom at the onset of its oscillations is diﬀerent from the current
value; θa ≡ φ(t = 0)/fa is an initial axion misalignment angle, and

P (θa) ≈ θ2
a

(75)

for small θa (the shape of P (θa) for general θa can be found, e.g., in Fig. 4 of [1]). We see that
axions with masses signiﬁcantly heavier than ∼ 10−19 eV would produce a contribution to the
dark matter density larger than the observed value Ωcdm ≈ 5Ωb, unless we happened to have an
atypically small initial misalignment angle θa.

As was realized long ago [28], this does not mean that such axions are necessarily in conﬂict
with the observed value of ζ ≡ Ωcdm/Ωb. Indeed, if inﬂation lasted suﬃciently long (and especially
if there were a period of eternal infaltion in the past) an initial misalignment angle θa is a dynamical
parameter that varies in space on scales much longer than the current size of the Universe, so there
will always exist regions with suﬃciently small value of θa to be in agreement with the observed
value of ζ. Still, one may wonder what is the probability for an observer in such a Universe to
ﬁnd himself in a region with as small values of ζ as we observe.

For a single QCD axion this question was addressed a number of times in the past [49, 50].
These treatments diﬀer in some details, however they agree that the observed value of ζ does not

5For the QCD axion this formula gets modiﬁed due to the temperature dependence of the axion mass. This is

not important for the discussion below.

47

appear to be anomalously small. Let us see how this conclusion changes if there are more than one
axions with masses (cid:38) 10−19 eV. Note that depending on which of the parameters are allowed to
vary the answer may be more or less sensitive to the uknown details of the statistics of string vacua
and to the infamous ambiguities with the probability measure in an eternally inﬂating Universe.
We ﬁnd the approach of [50]—to keep all the parameters apart from θa ﬁxed—the safest from
this point of view. In other words, we are restricting to comparing observers with all microphysical
parameters the same as ours, but the inﬂationary dynamics automatically produce diﬀerent initial
values of θa for them. In the string landscape the axion abundance is the last parameter that
may vary, so this approach is maximally close to the logic applied for predicting the results of a
conventional lab experiment—we ﬁx all particles physics parameters to the known values and see
what the dynamics of the system gives us. The important diﬀerence with a lab experiment is that
now we cannot ignore the selection eﬀects—the formation of observers is impossible in the regions
where the dark matter-to-baryon ratio ζ is either too big or too small. These so called anthropic
boundaries were estimated in [49]. Namely, for ζ (cid:46) 2.5 perturbations at the scales close to our
galaxy’s cease to grow, while at ζ (cid:38) 100 the density of baryons becomes so small that the disc
fragmentation instability leading to star formation does not develop. The observed value ζ ≈ 5
appears to be somewhat too close to the lower end of this interval.

Unfortunately, to quantify whether there is a real problem, we are still left with an ambiguity
related to the choice of the inﬂationary measure—the problem of comparing numbers of observers
measuring diﬀerent values of ζ given that these numbers are inﬁnite in an inﬁnite Universe for
any ζ in the anthropically allowed region. Following [50], let us consider what happens with
one particular choice—the causal diamond measure of [51]. This choice amounts to counting
the number of observers in a single Hubble patch of the late time de Sitter evolution. Another
simplifying assumption of [50] is that the number of observers per baryon is approximately constant
for 2.5 < ζ < 100 and zero otherwise.

The nice feature of the axion setup is that the prior probability distribution for ζ is known.

Indeed, generalizing (74) to the case when more than one axion is present we ﬁnd

ζ(θa) =

(cid:88)

a

c(µa)P (θa) .

(76)

The initial values θa is getting set during inﬂation when the axion backreaction on the cosmological
expansion is negligible, so that the prior distributions for all θa are ﬂat. Then the probability to
observe the dark matter-to-baryon ratio smaller than the observed ζ = 5 value is equal to

(cid:90)

P = N −1

2.5<ζ(θa)<5

(cid:81)

a dθa
1 + ζ(θa)

,

(77)

where a factor (1 + ζ(θa))−1 is speciﬁc to the causal diamond measure and appears because the
total number of baryons within a horizon at the transition to the de Sitter regime is proportional
to this factor. The normalization factor N is equal to

(cid:90)

2.5<ζ(θa)<100

(cid:81)

a dθa
1 + ζ(θa)

.

48

(78)

Expressions (77), (78) are signiﬁcantly simpliﬁed in the limit when all anthropic axions are suf-
ﬁciently heavy, so that the approximation (75) is accurate. In this regime one can get rid of the
mass dependence in (76) by rescaling θa → c(µa)−1/2θa. As a result, after integration over angular
variables in the θa space, one obtains,

P(n) =

(cid:82) 5
2.5
(cid:82) 100
2.5

dζζ(n−2)/2
1+ζ
dζζ(n−2)/2
1+ζ

= 0.3, 0.16, 0.06, 0.02, 0.006, . . .

(79)

where n is the number of axions, and we presented the numerical value of the probability for the
ﬁrst few values of n. We see that the probability drops exponentially as the number of axions in
the anthropic window grows, however, remains high enough for the ﬁrst few values of n. Clearly,
this general trend—that at large number of axions the probability distribution is peaked at the
higher anthropic boundary for ζ is generic and independent of the choice of the measure. It is
just a consequence of a geometrical factor ζ (n−2)/2 in the numerators of integrals in (79). For
instance, if we droped the (1 + ζ(θa))−1 factor and just used the prior probability distribution for
ζ (restricted to the anthropically allowed region), we would get 0.08, 0.03, 0.007, 0.001 for the
ﬁrst few probabilities. It is worth pointing out that these probabilities are sensitive to the position
of the anthropic boundary at large ζ, which is not the case in the presence of a single axion, as
pointed out in [50].

If a suﬃciently large number of axions is to be discovered in the anthropic region or, even if,
for a single QCD axion, it turns out that a signiﬁcant fraction of cold dark matter is composed
of WIMP’s, these probabilities may start being problematically low. However, one should keep
in mind that there are lots of uncertainties in the above estimates. Apart from a choice of the
inﬂationary measure, the assumption that the number of observers per baryon is constant over
the whole anthropic interval appears to be a vast oversimpliﬁcation, due to both astrophysical and
astrobiological reasons. On the astrophysical side it is far from clear that the number of stars is
proportional to the number of baryons in the whole range 2.5 < ζ < 100. Furthermore, the number
of observers may not scale linearly with the number of stars both due to astrophysical reasons, for
example due to close encounters, and due to astrobiological, if the early stages of the evolution
of life can be signiﬁcantly accelerated by the possibility of the transfer of organic molecules (or
primitive forms of life) from one stellar system to another (given that the closest known planetary
system is just 10 light years away this possibility is neither necessarily hypothetical nor untestable).
To summarize, we see that at the current stage of aﬀairs there is no reason to be discouraged on
the possibility of a discovery of multiple anthropic axions with astrophysical black holes observa-
tions. Conversely, if several anthropic axions were to be discovered (or even a single one if WIMPs
constitute a signiﬁcant fraction of dark matter) this will provide us with serious motivation to
scrutinize how the number density of observers depends on the baryon-to-dark matter ratio.

6 Conclusions

We hope to have convinced the reader that black hole superradiance for axions is an extremely
rich phenomenon that has good chances to be observed in near future measurements of black hole

49

properties. Ongoing black hole spin measurements may trace gaps or Regge trajectories in the
spectrum of rapidly spinning black holes. Advanced LIGO may observe gravitational wave signals
from the QCD axion cloud around stellar mass black holes as far as the Virgo cluster for masses
down to 10−10 eV which correspond to an axion decay constant close to the grand uniﬁcation
scale. In a more distant future, gravitational waves may be observed for supermassive black holes
at lower frequencies by experiments such as LISA and AGIS. The low frequency gravitational
wave detectors may also see the eﬀect of the cloud on the waveforms during extreme mass ratio
inspirals. Finally, for the QCD axion the superradiant cloud might also give rise to direct photon
signals.

In this paper our main goal has been to develop a general intuition about superradiance
development and its consequences without going into an extensive numerical work. Given the
richness of the system it seems inevitable that detailed numerical simulations will be required in the
future to obtain accurate quantitative predictions. This is especially important for predicting the
strength, duration and precise waveform of gravitational wave signals from superradiant clouds.
Simulations are needed both for the accurate prediction of superradiance rates, which to large
extent has already been accomplished in [30], and most importantly to get an accurate description
of the superradiant cloud including axion self-interactions. It’s worth stressing, however, that some
of our result are very robust. For instance, the black hole Regge trajectories of Fig. 3 are mostly
determined by the basic superradiance condition (3) and do not depend on the above uncertainties
(apart from the left most declining segments of these curves; however, in that region even larger
uncertainties are likely to come from variations in the accretion rate for diﬀerent black holes).

Of course, we expect also other qualitative results obtained here to reproduce well the gross
features of the system, although given its richness more surprises are possible. Most importantly,
our results appear encouraging for prospects to observe superradiance with future astrophysi-
cal data, and this justiﬁes further theoretical eﬀorts for better understanding of this fascinating
process.

7 Acknowledgements

We thank Savas Dimopoulos, John March-Russell and Nemanja Kaloper for collaboration at all
stages of the project. We also thank Tom Abel, Andrei Frolov, Gregory Gabadadze, Andrei
Gruzinov, Peter Graham, Steve Kahn, Mark Kasevich, Andrew MacFadyen, Sergei Sibiryakov,
Steve Shenker, David Shoemaker and Bob Wagoner for useful discussions.

Appendix A: Calculating the tunneling exponent (22)

In principle, it is straightforward to calculate the tunneling integral I numerically, however, let
us also describe an anlytical method that works for near-extremal black holes, a ≈ rg and for the
frequency ω right at the boundary of the superradiance region ω = mw+.

The latter condition has the following meaning. As we see from Fig. 5, each of the superradiant
levels has a maximum rate close to the boundary of the superradiant region. Of course, exactly at
the boundary the width of the level becomes zero. However, it is the pre-factor in (25) that turns

50

Figure 15: The tunneling exponent as a function of the black hole spin.

zero at ω = mw+, while the exponent I just passes smoothly through that point. Consequently,
by calculating I at ω = mw+ we will ﬁnd the upper envelope of the family of superradiant rates
for diﬀerent levels. Related to this, we will also set l = m, because this corresponds to the fastest
superradiance rate at any α. Finally, we also set µa = ω, which given the above assumptions
corresponds to taking l = 2α. This should be a good approximation given that superradiant levels
are close to be non-relativistic. Note that for the fastest level the radial number n also grows with
l, so that the upper bound (9) never gets saturated. All these assumptions were also made in [19].
The simpliﬁcation at ω = mw+ is that the location of r1 is known, namely r1 = r+, for this
choice of parameters. This fact is straightforward to check explicitly using (21). It is also easy to
understand intuitively—the only way for the tunneling rate (and, consequently, for the imaginary
part of an eigenfrequency ω) to vanish is for the tunneling to be “kinematically forbidden”, and
this is exactly what happens if V (r+) = 0. For all other values of ω the potential at the horizon
is negative, V (r+) = −(ω − mw+)2 and the imaginary part is non-zero.

A further simpliﬁcation happens at a = rg—in this case the second turning point coincides
with the horizon, r2 = r+ for l > 2. This implies that at ω = mw+ one cannot set a = rg before
performing the integral in (22). However, this makes the integration simple. Indeed at ω = mw+
we can write

V (r) = (r − r+)(r2 − r)v(r) ,

(80)

where in the limit a → rg the function v(r) has a ﬁnite non-vanishing limit in the whole interval

51

00.90.990.999125102050100200BlackHoleSpina(cid:144)rgI(cid:73)a(cid:145)rg(cid:77)(cid:73)Μa(cid:137)rg(cid:77)(r+, r2). Hence at ω = mw+, we can write the integral (22) in the limit a → rg as

I = v(r+)1/2(r2

+ + a2)

(cid:90) r2

r+

dr

(cid:114) r2 − r
r − r+

1
r − r−

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)a→rg

= 2πv(rg)1/2r2
g

(cid:18)(cid:114) r2 − r−
r+ − r−

− 1

(cid:19)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)a→rg

. (81)

Now, taking the second derivative of (80) with respect to r and setting a = r = rg we obtain,

v(rg)|a=rg

= −

1
2

∂2
r V (rg)|a=rg =

α(α − 1)
2r4
g

.

Similarly, taking the mixed second derivative of (80) with respect to r and a we obtain,

(cid:113)

g − a2 ∂ar2|a=rg
r2

(cid:113)

g − a2∂a
r2

=

(cid:18) ∂rV (rg)
g(rg)

+ r+

(cid:19)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)a=rg

=

3α + 1
1 − α

Equivalently, (83) implies that at a ≈ 1 one has

r2 = rg +

3α + 1
α − 1

(cid:113)

g − a2 + O(r2
r2

g − a2) .

(82)

(83)

(84)

Finally, by plugging (82) and (84) into (81), we obtain the following answer for the tunneling
integral in the extremal Kerr geometry

I = π

(cid:16)

(cid:17)
2α − (cid:112)2α(α − 1)

.

(85)

In principle, we can continue as above and work out higher order terms in the (1−a)-expansion
to arrive at the approximate analytical WKB formulaes for superradiant rates in the near-extremal
case. Instead, in Fig. 15 we present the result of a numerical integration of (22) as a function of
the black hole spin.

References

[1] A. Arvanitaki, S. Dimopoulos, S. Dubovsky, N. Kaloper and J. March-Russell,

arXiv:0905.4720 [hep-th].

[2] R. Narayan, New J. Phys. 7, 199 (2005) [arXiv:gr-qc/0506078].

[3] J. E. McClintock and R. A. Remillard, arXiv:0902.3488 [astro-ph.HE].

[4] L. Brenneman et al., arXiv:0902.4691 [astro-ph.HE].

[5] J. E. McClintock, R. Narayan, L. Gou, R. F. Penna and J. A. Steiner, arXiv:0911.5408

[astro-ph.HE].

[6] J. L. Blum et al., Astrophys. J. 706, 60 (2009) [arXiv:0909.5383 [astro-ph.HE]].

52

[7] P. Bender, et al., LISA Pre-Phase A Report, http://lisa.gsfc.nasa.gov/Documentation/ppa2.08.pdf

[8] S. Dimopoulos, P. W. Graham, J. M. Hogan, M. A. Kasevich and S. Rajendran, Phys. Rev.

D 78, 122002 (2008) [arXiv:0806.2125 [gr-qc]].

[9] S. Dimopoulos, P. W. Graham, J. M. Hogan, M. A. Kasevich and S. Rajendran, Phys. Lett.

B 678, 37 (2009) [arXiv:0712.1250 [gr-qc]].

[10] S. A. Hughes, AIP Conf. Proc. 873, 233 (2006) [arXiv:gr-qc/0608140].

[11] S. Dubovsky, P. Tinyakov and M. Zaldarriaga, JHEP 0711, 083 (2007) [arXiv:0706.0288

[hep-th]].

[12] R. Penrose, Riv. Nuovo Cim. 1, 252 (1969) [Gen. Rel. Grav. 34, 1141 (2002)].

[13] D. Christodoulou, Phys. Rev. Lett. 25, 1596 (1970).

[14] Ya. B. Zeldovich, JETP Lett. 14, 180 (1971)

[15] C. W. Misner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 28, 994 (1972).

[16] A. A. Starobinskii, Soviet Physics JETP, 37, 28 (1973)

[17] T. Damour, N. Deruelle and R. Ruﬃni, Lett. Nuovo Cim. 15, 257 (1976).

[18] I. M. Ternov, V. R. Khalilov, G. A. Chizhov and A. B. Gaina, Sov. Phys. J. 21, 1200 (1978)

[Izv. Vuz. Fiz. 21N9, 109 (1978)].

[19] T. J. M. Zouros and D. M. Eardley, Annals Phys. 118, 139 (1979).

[20] S. Detweiler, Phys. Rev. D 22, 2323 (1980).

[21] P. Svrcek and E. Witten, JHEP 0606, 051 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0605206].

[22] A. Arvanitaki, N. Craig, S. Dimopoulos, S. Dubovsky and J. March-Russell, arXiv:0909.5440

[hep-ph].

[23] W. H. Press and S. A. Teukolsky, Astrophys. J. 185, 649 (1973).

[24] W. H. Press and S. A. Teukolsky, Nature 238, 211 (1972)

[25] E. A. Donley, N. R. Claussen, S. L. Cornish, J. L. Roberts, E. A. Cornell, and C. E. Wieman,

Nature 412, 295(2001)

[26] https://dcc.ligo.org/cgi-bin/DocDB/ShowDocument?docid=2974; D. Shoemaker, private

communication.

[27] S. Hild, S. Chelkowski and A. Freise, arXiv:0810.0604 [gr-qc].

[28] A. D. Linde, Phys. Lett. B 201, 437 (1988).

53

[29] R. M. Wald, “General Relativity,” Chicago, Usa: Univ. Pr. ( 1984) 491p

[30] S. R. Dolan, Phys. Rev. D 76, 084001 (2007) [arXiv:0705.2880 [gr-qc]].

[31] D. R. Brill, P. L. Chrzanowski, C. Martin Pereira, E. D. Fackerell and J. R. Ipser, Phys. Rev.

D 5, 1913 (1972).

[32] E. Berti, V. Cardoso and M. Casals, Phys. Rev. D 73, 024013 (2006) [Erratum-ibid. D 73,

109902 (2006)] [arXiv:gr-qc/0511111].

[33] J. G. Rosa, arXiv:0912.1780 [hep-th].

[34] A. B. Gaina, Sov. Astron. Lett. 15, 243 (1989).

[35] M. J. Rees, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 22, 471 (1984).

[36] E. Fermi, G. E. Uhlenbeck, Phys. Rev. 44, 510 (1933)

[37] S. Weinberg, “Gravitation and Cosmology: Principles and Applications of the General Theory

of Relativity”, New York, USA: Wiley (1972) 657 p

[38] S. Babak, H. Fang, J. R. Gair, K. Glampedakis and S. A. Hughes, Phys. Rev. D 75, 024005

(2007) [Erratum-ibid. D 77, 04990 (2008)] [arXiv:gr-qc/0607007].

[39] C. Pethick, H. Smith, “Bose–Einstein Condensation in Dilute Gases”, Cambridge Univ. Press,

(2002) 402 p

[40] L. Gou et al., Astrophys. J. 701, 1076 (2009) [arXiv:0901.0920 [astro-ph.HE]].

[41] http://www.srl.caltech.edu/∼shane/sensitivity/

[42] N. Arkani-Hamed, L. Motl, A. Nicolis and C. Vafa, JHEP 0706, 060 (2007) [arXiv:hep-

th/0601001].

[43] J. March-Russell et al., work in progress.

[44] L. Ubaldi, Phys. Rev. D 81, 025011 (2010) [arXiv:0811.1599 [hep-ph]].

[45] V. G. Makhankov, Phys. Rept. 35, 1 (1978).

[46] S. L. Shapiro and S. A. Teukolsky, “Black holes, white dwarfs, and neutron stars: The physics

of compact objects,” New York, USA: Wiley (1983) 645 p

[47] S. L. Shapiro, Astrophys. J. 620, 59 (2005) [arXiv:astro-ph/0411156].

[48] M. Volonteri, arXiv:1003.4404 [astro-ph.CO].

[49] M. Tegmark, A. Aguirre, M. Rees and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. D 73, 023505 (2006)

[arXiv:astro-ph/0511774].

54

[50] B. Freivogel, arXiv:0810.0703 [hep-th].

[51] R. Bousso, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 191302 (2006) [arXiv:hep-th/0605263].

55

