RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS   269
© 2023 The Authors. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of The Ecological Society of America.
Tropical cyclone risk to global mangrove 
ecosystems: potential future regional shifts
Yu Mo1,2*, Marc Simard3, and Jim W Hall2
Tropical cyclones pose a major risk to mangroves, yet the evolution of risk in response to altered cyclone activity under climate 
change remains largely unexplored. Analyzing 1886 tropical cyclones (1980– 2020), we found that mangrove ecosystems were most 
prone to major cyclones (Category 3–  5), and that intense cyclones (Category 4–  5) contributed 97% of the global risk of damage. 
Risk hotspots were found in mangroves bordering the Gulf of Mexico/Caribbean Sea, the South Indian Ocean, and the Northwest 
Pacific. With warming of 2°C, the risk changes were projected to be modest (+3%) at the global scale but substantial and divergent 
at the regional level. Risk in North America (including Central America) and Oceania was predicted to increase and decrease by 
more than 10%, respectively. Our results identify regions where cyclone- activity- induced ecosystem changes may be expected and 
where mangrove management needs to prioritize cyclone resilience.
Front Ecol Environ 2023; 21(6): 269–274, doi:10.1002/fee.2650
M
angroves are important coastal ecosystems that provide 
a diversity of economic, social, and ecological services –   
including food provision, water purification, biodiversity con-
servation, storm protection, and carbon sequestration –  valued 
at over US$20,000 ha– 1 yr– 1 (Temmerman et al. 2013; Del Valle 
et al.  2020; Su et al. 2021). Tropical cyclones (TCs) are the most 
destructive natural disturbance faced by mangroves, causing 
45% of their naturally induced mortality, and in some regions 
(such as North America and Oceania) are a primary driver of 
mangrove loss (Sippo et al.  2018; Goldberg et al.  2020). In 
addition, the damage to individual trees is mechanistically 
linked to mangrove ecosystem structure and function (Simard 
et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2020). Therefore, a more thorough under -
standing of the TC- associated risk of damage is imperative for 
improving mangrove management.
A TC can damage mangroves directly through physical forces 
such as wind and storm surges and indirectly by inducing hydro-
logical and environmental changes such as ponding and hypersa-
linization. At the community level, such damage usually manifests 
as defoliation, canopy cover reduction, and tree mortality (Hogan 
et al.  2020; Krauss and Osland  2020). The level of damage at a 
given site is influenced by many factors, including the storm’s 
attributes (such as wind speed and accumulated rainfall) and the 
site’s relative location to the storm track (such as distance and 
quadrant to the track) (Svejkovsky et al. 2020; Taillie et al. 2020). 
Damage levels may also be influenced by the characteristics of 
the mangrove ecosystems (such as species composition, canopy 
height, and tree density) (Armitage et al. 2019; Walcker et al. 2019; 
Pennings et al.  2021) and by the features of the coastal environ-
ment (such as elevation and historical cyclone frequency) (Taillie 
et al.  2020; Lagomasino et al.  2021). Furthermore, the damage 
could be aggravated by prior natural and anthropogenic distur-
bances (such as chilling and anthropogenic hydrological modifi-
cation) (Zhang et al. 2016; Walcker et al. 2019).
Advances in satellite-  based Earth observations have 
recently enabled large- scale studies to sample multiple (tens 
of) storms, demonstrating the effectiveness of predicting TC 
damage to mangroves at the regional and global scale with 
storm intensity (that is, [local] wind speed and accumulated 
rainfall [Taillie et al.  2020], and wind speed and distance to 
track [Peereman et al.  2021]). Climate change is projected to 
affect TC activity, with global TC intensity and frequency 
expected to increase and decrease, respectively (eg Knutson 
et al.  2020). Crucial questions, therefore, arise. How may the 
risk of damage change as TC activity changes under future 
climate conditions? And more importantly, how will the risk 
evolve regionally? Addressing these questions is critical for 
developing mangrove management strategies under climate 
change.
Here, we tackled these questions by conducting a global 
study based on storm records and continuous satellite- based 
Earth observations over the past four decades. We sampled 
1886 Category 1– 5 TCs (1980– 2020) to systematically quantify 
the damage (measured by remote- sensed vegetation index) 
and risk (combining damage and frequency) to mangrove eco-
systems induced by TCs of different intensities (ie categories). 
We then estimated the risk evolution at global and regional 
scales based on projected changes in TC activity.
Methods
Cyclone records
As identified from the International Best Track Archive 
for Climate Stewardship (IBTrACS V4) using the 
1Zoology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland *(moyu@tcd.ie);  
2Environmental Change Institute, School of Geography and the Environment,  
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; 3Radar Science and Engineering Section,  
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA

Front Ecol Environ doi:10.1002/fee.2650
Y Mo et al.
270  RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS
Saffir– Simpson wind scale (SSWS), a total of 1886 TCs 
(Category 1 to 5) occurred around the world between 
1980 and 2020 ([Knapp et al.  2018; NOAA  2021]; Figure  1; 
see WebPanel 1  for more details). The SSWS was deter-
mined based on the TC’s lifetime- maximum wind speed, 
so as to align with the TC activity change projections. 
For each category of TC, a map of annual frequency at 
1° resolution was created using the recorded cyclone track 
points. The regional- scale TC activity changes projected 
with a 2°C increase in global mean temperature were 
adapted from a systematic assessment conducted by 
Knutson et al. (2020), which incorporated studies reviewed 
in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth 
Report and more recent work. TC damage to mangroves 
was evaluated with TCs that occurred after 2001.
Mangrove extent
The global mangrove extent was delineated based on the 
Global Mangrove Forests Distribution (GMFD) dataset 
(Figure  1; Giri et al.  2011). The GMFD dataset was chosen 
because it was specifically derived from Landsat data and 
coincided with the start of our study period for assessing 
TC damage to mangroves (ie 2000). We minimized the 
impact of changes in mangrove extent on our results by 
computing the pre- cyclone baseline conditions for each TC 
event and then identifying changes relative to the baselines 
(see WebPanel 1 for more details). TC frequencies within 
mangrove ecosystems of each of the 120 countries, dependent 
territories, and special areas of geographical interest defined 
in the GMFD dataset (hereafter, “countries”) were calculated 
by intersecting the TC frequency maps with the country’s 
mangrove extent (with a 1° buffer zone, to account for all 
potential TC damage).
Tropical cyclone damage to mangroves
For each TC event, the conditions of mangroves within 100 
km on either side of the TC’s track were monitored for 6 
years (1 year before the TC to 5 years after the TC) using 
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) 
Terra and Aqua Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI) com-
posites (WebPanel 1; Didan et al.  2015). We assessed man-
grove conditions using five variables: EVI, areal extent, 
number of patches, average patch size, and size of the largest 
patch. Measurements from the 12 months before a TC event 
(eg July 2019– June 2020, if the TC occurred in July 2020) 
were considered to be baseline conditions, and all meas-
urements were normalized against their baselines.
The normalized measurements were then compiled for each 
category of TC, grouped into 3- month time steps, and tested 
using one- way analysis of variance (ANOV A) and Tukey post- 
hoc tests (significance at P < 0.05; WebPanel 1). A TC Damage 
Index (TCDI) was calculated by aggregating significant 
decreases in normalized EVI ( /uni0302.s3EVI) over time (t) and distance 
(d) for each category (cat) of TC:
The uncertainty of the TCDI was calculated by pooling the 
variance of the EVI measurements. The TC Risk Index (TCRI) 
was computed by multiplying the TCDI and the frequency 
(Freq) of TC of that category:
The uncertainty of the TCRI was calculated by propagating the 
uncertainties of the TCRI and the TC frequency.
(Equation 1).TCDIcat =
t,d/uni2211.s1
1 − /uni0302.s3EVIcat
(Equation 2).TCRIcat = TCDIcat × Freqcat
Figure 1. Tropical cyclones (TCs) and the risk they pose to global mangrove ecosystems. TC categories were determined based on the Saffir– Simpson 
wind scale and the lifetime- maximum wind speed of the storms. Areas within the purple circles are proportional to the Tropical Cyclone Risk Index (TCRI) 
of different countries. The abbreviated names of the ten countries with the highest total risk (Australia, Bahamas, China, Cuba, Japan, Madagascar, 
Mexico, Mozambique, Philippines, US) and with the highest risk per unit area of mangroves (Anguilla, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Guam, Macau, 
Marshall Islands, Northern Mariana Islands, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Taiwan, Tuvalu) appear in bold and in italics, respectively.
 15409309, 2023, 6, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/fee.2650 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Front Ecol Environ doi:10.1002/fee.2650
Tropical cyclone risk to mangrove ecosystems
RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS   271
Results and discussion
Damage extent and ratio
Damage to mangrove systems was detected only as a result 
of major TCs (Category 3 or higher), and primarily from 
intense TCs (Category 4 and 5) (Figure  2; WebFigure  1). 
Damage was exhibited as decreases in EVI and areal extent 
and as an increase in mangrove canopy fragmentation (ie 
the average patch size and the largest patch size decreased, 
and the number of patches increased). Using EVI as the 
measure, the damage from a Category 3, 4, and 5 TC (i) 
led to (on average) a 5%, 10%, and 20% reduction, respec-
tively, in pre- cyclone baseline values; (ii) was detected up 
to 40 km, 50 km, and 50 km, respectively, away from the 
cyclone track; and (iii) recovered in (on average) 3 months, 
1 year, and 2 years, respectively (Figure  2; WebFigure  2). 
Integrating the damage over space and time, the ratio of 
the overall damage of a Category 5, 4, and 3 TC was 
estimated to be 29:13:1 (inferred by TCDI; WebFigure  3).
Our results suggest that only if a storm develops into a 
major TC (Category 3– 5) will it be likely to cause substantial 
damage to mangrove ecosystems. This is in general agreement 
with existing observations that major TCs almost always cause 
extremely visible effects on mangroves (Krauss and 
Osland  2020). We recognize that wind speed at landfall –   
along with other factors influencing local wind speed, such as 
distance and quadrant to the track –  is a more direct predictor 
of damage at a given site (eg Svejkovsky et al.  2020; Taillie 
et al.  2020). To interpret our findings under that perspective, 
we examined the wind speed at landfall for all Category 1– 5 
TCs over the past four decades. We found that the median val-
ues of maximum wind speed at landfall for Category 1– 2 TCs 
were between 50 and 70 km hr −1  and those for Category 3– 5 
TCs were between 75 and 100 km hr−1  (WebPanel 1). Therefore, 
our results also agree with a previous study (based on the 2017 
North Atlantic hurricane season) showing that the probability 
of damage is very low (~0.1) when local maximum wind speed 
is less than 75 km hr−1  (Taillie et al. 2020).
The damage magnitudes and durations revealed by our 
analysis are within the lower range of values previously 
reported (ie magnitudes of 3– 100% decrease in canopy cover 
and duration of 3 months to over 10 years, if not permanent; 
WebPanel 2; note that TC categories reported in previous stud-
ies were re- categorized based on lifetime- maximum wind 
speed to align with our analysis). The values reported here are 
on the conservative side, partially because (i) we focused on 
the average damage in 10- km- wide zones, whereas the greatest 
damage (over 50% decrease in vegetation index) mostly 
occurred at scales less than 1 km (eg Svejkovsky et al.  2020) 
and (ii) previous in situ studies were likely to focus on sites 
with the most damage (eg Asbridge et al.  2018). The small 
magnitude and short recovery time of TC- induced damage to 
mangroves at the landscape scale conforms to the theory that 
mangrove systems are adapted to TC disturbance (Krauss and 
Osland  2020). On the other hand, with respect to the 
maximum distances from cyclone tracks at which damage 
occurred, the values that we observed here were higher than 
most of the values reported in the literature, largely because the 
majority of previous studies were not designed to detect the 
extent of damage.
The regain in EVI that occurred after cyclones may have 
reflected mangrove canopy recovery through re- foliation, re- 
sprouting, and sapling and seedling growth (Krauss and 
Osland  2020), and possibly also the growth of understory 
Figure 2.  The temporal and spatial characteristics of the damage of 
major tropical cyclones to mangrove ecosystems. Means are shown with 
dashes (baseline values) and solid circles (values differ significantly 
from the baselines at P  < 0.05), and standard deviations are shown in 
bars. (a) Mangrove conditions before and after TCs (at the 0– 10 km zone 
for Category 4– 5 TCs and the 20– 30 km zone for Category 3 TCs).  
(b) Mangrove condition changes over distance (6 months following the 
cyclone).
 15409309, 2023, 6, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/fee.2650 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Front Ecol Environ doi:10.1002/fee.2650
Y Mo et al.
272  RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS
herbaceous plants (Svejkovsky et al.  2020). The fact that the 
mangrove’s EVI returned to pre- cyclone levels, as shown in our 
results, highlights mangrove recovery, as mangroves have 
higher EVI than herbaceous plants. The 2- year recovery period 
for the areas that experienced the greatest damage (ie within 20 
km of the track of Category 5 TCs; WebFigure  2) is commen-
surate with the growth of mangrove seedlings to juveniles (eg 
López- Hoffman et al.  2007), which might have been the main 
recovery pathway in those areas.
Intensified and delayed damage
In addition to the general patterns of recovery from dis-
turbance, the temporal and spatial characteristics of the 
damage also exhibited some interesting features that might 
shed light on damage mechanisms. For example, intensified 
damage was found within the 10– 20 km and 40– 50 km 
zones for Category 4– 5 TCs, and damage from Category 3 
TCs was detected only within the 20– 30 km and 30– 40 km 
zones (Figure  2; WebFigure  1). These patterns may reflect 
the distribution of the TC’s physical forces (ie the cyclone’s 
primary and secondary eyewalls that are usually located at 
15 km and 50 km from the storm center, respectively; Houze 
et al.  2006). Another possible explanation for this phenom-
enon is that many TCs may have passed the mangroves 
on their seaward side (without making landfall), and these 
patterns reflect the high resistance of mangroves at the 
shoreline due to shorter canopy heights and protection from 
strong winds as a result of being submerged by storm surges 
(Krauss and Osland 2020), an effect that becomes less rel-
evant as winds become more powerful (Category 4– 5).
Another notable finding is that damage was only detected 6– 9 
months after Category 3 TCs, and that the most severe damage 
was observed 6– 9 months after Category 4 TCs and 3– 6 months 
after Category 5 TCs. Recent studies have reported delayed tree 
mortality; for instance, tree mortality in Florida following 
Hurricane Irma in 2017 occurred 9 months after the storm, with 
one of the largest recorded dieback events (over 10,000 ha) 
occurring a full 15 months afterward (Radabaugh et al.  2020; 
Lagomasino et al.  2021). The delayed mortality and dieback in 
the months after Irma were primarily attributed to storm-  
induced hydrological changes (ie mud deposition and ponding), 
which can lead to stresses like oxygen limitation, phytotoxin 
accumulation, and hypersalinization (Radabaugh et al.  2020; 
Lagomasino et al. 2021). Defoliation that occurred during storms 
can increase mangrove susceptibility to these stresses, given that 
leaves are essential for mangrove salt regulation (Asbridge 
et al.  2018). Our analysis detected delayed impacts on a global 
scale, indicating that damage from storm- induced hydrological 
changes may be far more substantial than previously recognized.
Risk distribution and projected changes
Integrating with their frequency, at the global level, intense 
TCs composed 97% of the risk of damage (inferred by TCRI; 
WebFigure 3). At the country level, the risk was widely 
distributed across the globe (Figure  1). Hotspots of risk 
were found in mangroves bordering the Gulf/Caribbean, 
the South Indian Ocean, and the Northwest Pacific. In addi-
tion to the well- recognized high risk in the Gulf/Caribbean 
region and Oceania (Goldberg et al.  2020; Krauss and 
Osland  2020), our results highlight the risk within the 
Northwest Pacific, revealing that the region contains three 
of the ten countries with the highest total risk (China, Japan, 
and the Philippines) and four of the ten countries with the 
highest risk per unit area of mangroves (Guam, the Marshall 
Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Taiwan).
With a 2°C increase in global mean temperature, we esti-
mated that future global TC frequency (within mangrove hab-
itats) would marginally decrease (– 2%); however, with an 
increase in the frequency of intense TCs, future global risk 
might slightly increase (+3%) (WebFigure  3). At the regional 
level, on the other hand, changes could be substantial. The risk 
to most mangroves around the Northeast Pacific, North 
Atlantic, and North and South Indian Ocean was predicted to 
increase, while the risk to mangroves bordering the Northwest 
Pacific and Southwest Pacific was predicted to decrease 
(Figure  3). Notably, the risk to mangroves in North America 
(including Central America) and the Caribbean was projected 
to increase by over 10%, and the risk to mangroves in Oceania 
was projected to decrease by over 10%.
An increase in global storm risk to mangroves under cli-
mate change is often suggested in the scientific literature, given 
the projected increase in future storm intensity (Sippo 
et al.  2018; Krauss and Osland  2020). Our results suggest that 
the increase in global risk might be modest, and that major 
shifts could happen at the regional level. The changes in risk 
are mostly driven by projected changes in the activity of 
intense TCs (Category 4– 5), which in turn is a combined result 
of the projected changes in TC genesis and intensity (ie the 
future frequency of intense TCs is determined by future total 
TC frequency and the proportion of future TCs that will reach 
Category 4– 5 intensity). The projected increase in TC intensity 
is probably driven primarily by projected increases in sea- 
surface temperature (SST), while the physical mechanisms 
responsible for the projected decreases in TC frequency are 
less clear and may involve factors including SST, atmospheric 
moisture and temperature profiles, and upward mass flux 
(Knutson et al.  2020; Chand et al.  2022). Consequently, 
regional variation in SST is likely to be a key driver of the 
divergent changes in future intense TC activity and therefore 
storm risk to mangroves.
It should be noted that the projections of TC intensity have 
greater agreement among existing studies than do the projec-
tions of TC frequency, and that projections are more robust at 
the global scale than for individual basins (Knutson et al.  2020). 
To account for uncertainty in projections of TC activity, we 
used values from a synthesized assessment involving numer -
ous studies (eg Knutson et al.  2020). We also incorporated 
uncertainty of the TC activity projections into the uncertainty 
of our TC risk projections (WebFigure  4). It should also be 
 15409309, 2023, 6, Downloaded from https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/fee.2650 by CochraneChina, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Front Ecol Environ doi:10.1002/fee.2650
Tropical cyclone risk to mangrove ecosystems
RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS   273
noted that our analysis did not account for (i) changes in sub-
regional TC activity (Bloemendaal et al. 2022), which are likely 
to lead to more complex spatial patterns of shifts in risk, or (ii) 
projected increases in sea level and storm- induced surges, pre-
cipitation, and flooding, which are likely to amplify TC damage 
and thus risk (Woodruff et al. 2013).
Implications
Our TC risk assessment highlights regions where natural 
resource managers should prioritize actions to enhance man-
grove resilience. For example, in Asia, fast- growing but storm- 
susceptible Rhizophora species are often used in mangrove 
restoration projects to facilitate rapid expansion of mangrove 
area at relatively low cost (Lee et al.  2019). Our study identifies 
areas that face high TC risk, where the use of more storm-  
resilient species would therefore be required. In addition, our 
results projected major shifts in TC risk to mangrove ecosystems 
under climate change, signifying potential changes in commu-
nity structure and thus ecosystem functions, such as carbon 
sequestration and biodiversity conservation. For instance, man-
groves that face increasing TC risk are likely to have reduced 
average tree height and favor the establishment of shade-  
intolerant species (Lin et al. 2020). Such effects may also be man-
ifest in mangrove encroachment at high latitudes in response to 
warming winter temperatures, with the new mangrove commu-
nities possibly differing greatly from the old mangrove forests in 
regions expected to experience dramatic changes in TC risk.
The observed delay in damage (an average lag of 6 months) 
also has major research and management implications. For 
example, it suggests that to fully capture the damage incurred, 
assessments must be conducted in the months following a 
storm and not simply immediately afterward. It also highlights 
the need for further investigation into the potentially profound 
impacts of cyclone- induced environmental change. Studies can 
compare the damage progression (or recovery) in sites sub-
jected to direct (ie via the physical forces of storm wind and 
surge) or indirect (ie via cyclone- induced hydrological changes 
such as ponding) damage. Research may also compare the pos-
itive (eg fertilization; Castaneda- Moya et al.  2020) and nega -
tive (eg smothering; Radabaugh et al.  2020; Lagomasino 
et al.  2021) effects of storm- induced sedimentation in those 
sites. Furthermore, human activities, such as road and levee 
construction, may have modified the hydrologic conditions of 
mangrove habitats and increased their susceptibility to storm- 
induced changes (Walcker et al.  2019). A better understanding 
of the impacts of storm- induced hydrological changes would 
provide additional guidance to these activities. This knowledge 
may also be critical to the management of coastal ecosystems 
more broadly, as these ecosystems often exhibit similar 
responses to disturbance (Patrick et al. 2022).
Acknowledgements
This project received funding from the EU Horizon 2020 
research and innovation program under the Marie 
Sklodowska- Curie grant agreement No 838024 and the Irish 
Research Council under grant number GOIPD/2022/519. 
Part of the research was conducted at the Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a con-
tract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA, 80NM0018D0004). MS was funded by the NASA 
Land- Cover and Land- Use Change (LCLUC) program.
Data Availability Statement
The code for acquiring and analyzing data, as well as the 
data underlyi