112 | Nature | Vol 621 | 7 September 2023
Article
Widespread retreat of coastal habitat is 
likely at warming levels above 1.5 °C
Neil Saintilan1,2 ✉, Benjamin Horton3,4, Torbjörn E. Törnqvist5, Erica L. Ashe6, Nicole S. Khan7, 
Mark Schuerch8, Chris Perry9, Robert E. Kopp6, Gregory G. Garner6, Nicholas Murray10, 
Kerrylee Rogers11, Simon Albert12, Jeffrey Kelleway11, Timothy A. Shaw3, Colin D. Woodroffe11, 
Catherine E. Lovelock13, Madeline M. Goddard14, Lindsay B. Hutley14, Katya Kovalenko15, 
Laura Feher16 & Glenn Guntenspergen17
Several coastal ecosystems—most notably mangroves and tidal marshes—exhibit 
biogenic feedbacks that are facilitating adjustment to relative sea-level rise (RSLR), 
including the sequestration of carbon and the trapping of mineral sediment1. The 
stability of reef-top habitats under RSLR is similarly linked to reef-derived sediment 
accumulation and the vertical accretion of protective coral reefs
2. The persistence  
of these ecosystems under high rates of RSLR is contested3. Here we show that the 
probability of vertical adjustment to RSLR inferred from palaeo-stratigraphic 
observations aligns with contemporary in situ survey measurements. A deficit 
between tidal marsh and mangrove adjustment and RSLR is likely at 4 mm yr
−1  and 
highly likely at 7 mm yr−1  of RSLR. As rates of RSLR exceed 7 mm yr−1 , the probability 
that reef islands destabilize through increased shoreline erosion and wave over- 
topping increases. Increased global warming from 1.5 °C to 2.0 °C would double the 
area of mapped tidal marsh exposed to 4 mm yr−1  of RSLR by between 2080 and 2100. 
With 3 °C of warming, nearly all the world’s mangrove forests and coral reef islands 
and almost 40% of mapped tidal marshes are estimated to be exposed to RSLR of at 
least 7 mm yr−1 . Meeting the Paris agreement targets would minimize disruption to 
coastal ecosystems.
Coastal ecosystems have long been recognized as indispensable to the 
well-being and subsistence of millions of people4. Marine vegetation 
and fringing reefs attenuate wave energy, protecting coastlines while 
providing habitat to distinctive assemblages of species. Coral reefs are 
productive ecosystems of high ecological value, and reef islands—con-
sisting of biogenic carbonate sands—are frequently inhabited by com-
munities dependent on these resources2. Vegetated coastal ecosystems 
(mangroves, tidal marshes, seagrass meadows and kelp forests) are 
foundational to coastal fisheries5 and are, in addition, well placed to 
contribute to CO2 removal in efforts to maintain warming below 2 °C. 
Global guidelines6 and a growing understanding of conservation and 
restoration opportunities are enabling an increasing number of coastal 
nations to account for carbon that is captured and stored in coastal 
and marine ecosystems (‘blue carbon’) while enhancing the coastal 
protection afforded by living shorelines7. Several jurisdictions have 
enacted or are progressing incentives for tidal wetland protection, 
restoration and/or creation8 to reverse centuries of decline, slowing 
the rate of mangrove loss9 and demonstrating the potential for rebuild-
ing coastal ecosystems damaged by the human population footprint 
in the coastal zone10.
These important ecosystems face an uncertain future as a result of 
human-induced climate change. Many of the most important coastal 
ecosystems show biogenic responses to RSLR that enhance their 
physical resilience11. The potential for high rates of sedimentation, 
productivity and organic matter preservation in mangroves and tidal 
marshes and the productivity of coral reefs have enabled them to grow 
vertically with RSLR over millennia12. We refer to this process as ‘verti-
cal adjustment’ . Vertical adjustment can maintain a wetland above a 
drowning threshold, a buffer referred to as ‘elevation capital’13. For reef 
island systems, vertical adjustment maintains the uppermost portions 
of a reef near mean sea level. Where the rate of vertical adjustment 
falls behind the rate of RSLR, an elevation deficit emerges, and the 
surface is exposed to increasing depth and duration of inundation. 
This change in inundation may enhance vertical adjustment3, but if a 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06448-z
Received: 15 March 2020
Accepted: 18 July 2023
Published online: 30 August 2023
Open access
 Check for updates
1School of Natural Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. 2Institute of Plant Science and Microbiology, Universität Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany. 3Earth 
Observatory of Singapore, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore. 4Asian School of the Environment, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore. 5Department 
of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, USA. 6Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences and Rutgers Institute of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences, 
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA. 7Department of Earth Sciences, Swire Institute of Marine Science and Institute of Climate and Carbon Neutrality, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong. 8Catchments and Coasts Research Group, Department of Geography, University of Lincoln, Lincoln, UK. 9Geography, Faculty of Environment, Science & Economy, University of 
Exeter, Exeter, UK. 10College of Science and Engineering, James Cook University, Townsville, Queensland, Australia. 11School of Earth Atmospheric and Life Sciences and GeoQuEST Research 
Centre, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia. 12School of Civil Engineering, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. 13School of Biological 
Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. 14Research Institute of Environment and Livelihoods, Faculty of Science and Technology, Charles Darwin University, 
Darwin, Northern Territory, Australia. 15Natural Resources Research Institute, University of Minnesota–Duluth, Duluth, MN, USA. 16US Geological Survey, Wetland and Aquatic Research Centre, 
Lafayette, LA, USA. 17US Geological Survey, Eastern Ecological Research Center, Beltsfield, MD, USA. ✉e-mail: neil.saintilan@mq.edu.au
Nature | Vol 621 | 7 September 2023 | 113
deficit is sustained for a sufficiently long period, elevation capital is 
exhausted. For wetlands, retreat and a transition to open water may 
occur, and in reef islands, submergence of reef crests will increase 
wave exposure and wave over-topping frequency. Whether the areal 
extent of the habitat expands or contracts over time depends on the 
rate of loss and the rate of new habitat formation, both both of which 
are influenced by RSLR14.
Contemporary observations of high accretion rates in coastal ecosys-
tems have indicated resilience under current and projected RSLR rates, 
prompting reassessment of their vulnerability in modelling studies3,11,14. 
Conversely, studies emerging from the palaeo record show a compara-
tively high vulnerability of mangroves12 and tidal marshes15,16 to rates of 
RSLR that are anticipated in coming decades under moderate and high 
emissions scenarios17. Palaeo records show that most coral reef islands 
formed during the later stages of the Holocene epoch under conditions 
of stable or falling relative sea level2 (RSL). The upper limits of resilience 
to projected RSLR remains an important knowledge gap, with wide 
ranging implications for coastal zone protection and management.
Here we analyse three independent lines of evidence to assess the 
vulnerability and exposure of coastal ecosystems to the higher rates of 
sea-level rise (4 mm yr−1  to more than 10 mm yr−1 ) projected under global 
warming scenarios. We focus on intertidal and supratidal ecosystems 
that undergo vertical adjustment from biogenic feedbacks, facilitat-
ing resilience to RSLR: mangroves, tidal marshes and coral reef island 
systems. We exclude beaches, rocky reefs and rock platforms, for which 
biogenic feedbacks with RSLR are largely absent, and subtidal vegetated 
ecosystems (seagrass meadows and kelp forests) for which thermal 
stress is likely to be the primary driver of change, rather than RSLR18,19. 
First, we review the behaviour of these ecosystems over the range of 
sea-level histories encountered following the Last Glacial Maximum 
19 thousand years ago (ka), and particularly since 10 ka. Second, for 
mangroves and tidal marshes, we document elevation trends in rela-
tion to contemporary rates of RSLR using a global network of survey 
benchmarks, the surface elevation table-marker horizon (SET-MH) 
network. Third, we analyse the extent to which contemporary coastal 
ecosystems show conversion to open water (hereafter referred to as 
‘retreat’) under a range of settings with varying rates of RSLR. From 
these three lines of evidence, we estimate the probability of coastal 
ecosystem retreat in relation to RSLR rates and model the response of 
the world’s existing coastal ecosystems under the RSLR projections of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Sixth Assess-
ment Report17, including potential compensation through conversion 
of terrestrial uplands (hereafter ‘landward migration’). From these 
analyses a picture emerges of the narrowing boundaries of the ‘safe 
operating space’20 for coastal ecosystems: the climate futures expected 
to be of low risk to existing ecosystems.
Responses to past sea-level rise
RSL varies globally in response to both water and land vertical move-
ment
21. Coastlines continue to adjust to the loss of ice sheets after the 
previous glacial period, particularly in higher latitudes, a process called 
glacial isostatic adjustment21,22 (GIA). GIA modelling provides insights 
into sea-level trends since the last deglaciation. These observations 
and models have been applied to interpret rates of RSLR associated 
with the timing of mangrove and tidal marsh retreat and/or advance 
in stratigraphic successions, with results showing broad consistency 
among settings
12,15.
Rapid global mean sea-level (GMSL) rise (over 10 mm yr−1 ) during 
several periods since the Last Glacial Maximum has drowned mangrove 
forests and tidal marshes (Fig. 1). Periods of rapid GMSL rise include: 
(1) meltwater pulse 1A (14.6–14.3 ka) which drowned mangroves, tidal 
marshes and coral reefs, the remains of which have been found at water 
depths of around 90 m; and (2) a rapid rise in GMSL 11.3–11.0 ka, leav-
ing relict features at water depths of around 50 m. Interspersed with 
these phases have been periods of slower GMSL rise, allowing extended 
periods of coastal ecosystem expansion (Fig. 1; Methods). For exam-
ple, mangrove sediments associated with preserved coastal palaeo 
channels on the Sahul Shelf (northwest of mainland Australia) and 
the Sunda Shelf (western South China Sea) dating to 16.0–14.5 ka were 
probably drowned during meltwater pulse 1A (Methods). Mangrove 
forests re-established in India from around 10 ka on the former delta 
of the Ganges–Brahmaputra River (Fig. 1 ) and the northeast Austral-
ian continental shelf (Queensland). In both locations, RSLR declined 
to between 6 and 7 mm yr−1 , and rates of sedimentation were high. 
These forests were subsequently drowned during a period of more 
rapid RSLR of 7 to 8 mm yr−1  between 9.0 and 8.5 ka (Methods). Wide-
spread mangrove forest development commenced around 8.5–7.5 ka 
in Southeast Asia, northern and eastern Australia, South America and 
Africa (Fig. 1) as the rate of RSLR declined12 below 7 mm yr−1  (Fig. 2c), 
and mangroves associated with large rivers were able to maintain their 
intertidal position by trapping sediment and accumulating root mass.
Tidal marshes in Great Britain were 9 times more likely to retreat than 
advance during the Holocene when RSLR exceeded 7.1 mm yr−1 , based on 
more than 780 reconstructions of tidal marsh evolution15 (Fig. 2b). In the 
Mississippi Delta, only short-lived and rapidly retreating fringing tidal 
marshes existed before 8.2 ka, with retreat occurring in approximately 
50 years before RSLR slowed16 to less than 6 to 9 mm yr−1 . Tidal marsh 
retreat took longer (centuries), as RSLR dropped below 6 mm yr−1  after 
around 8.2 ka, but marshes did not stop retreating in the Mississippi 
Delta16 until RSLR was less than 3 mm yr−1  (Fig. 2b).
Sea level stabilized in the mid-Holocene in those parts of the world 
that were distant from former centres of glaciation, and many coral 
reefs—especially in the Pacific—reached sea level with diversification 
of reef habitats
23. Subsequent fall of sea level relative to these regions 
resulted in emergent reef platforms, some of which became suitable 
habitat for mangroves, and on which it became possible for reef islands 
to form24. Infilling of estuaries resulted in development of extensive 
coastal plains12, reducing intertidal areas previously covered by man-
groves, including in coastal Northern Australia (South Alligator River, 
Fitzroy River, Ord River, Cleveland Bay and Richmond River), Thailand 
(Great Songkhla Lakes) and Vietnam (Mekong River and Red River).
The palaeo record therefore indicates a capacity for vertical adjust-
ment to rates of RSLR similar to those encountered in the instrumen-
tal period. If these rates of RSLR are sustained, coastal lowlands may 
be re-occupied by tidal wetlands where migration is permitted, and 
in many places this encroachment has already commenced 25. The 
potential for increased extent in these regions under higher sea level 
is captured in global wetland adjustment models14,26. However, there 
is consistent evidence that vertical adjustment and habitat extent are 
greatly reduced
12,23 as RSLR approaches 7 to 8 mm yr−1 .
Elevation trends under current sea-level rise
Mangrove and tidal marsh accretion can increase with the rate of 
RSLR. Increased inundation depth and duration can facilitate both 
mineral deposition 27 and higher plant productivity and root mass 
accumulation11. Rates of accretion measured against artificial marker 
horizons and radiometric markers often correspond to high rates of 
RSLR encountered in settings where land is subsiding3,28,29. High rates 
of accretion (10 to 20 mm yr−1 ) have been observed in contemporary 
mangroves and tidal marshes on active deltas29,30, and accretion in 
the intertidal zone increases with increased depth and duration of 
inundation3. The assumption that accretion enables vertical adjust-
ment to RSLR is the basis of projections of possible resilience under 
projected future rates31, but the assumption requires testing against 
fixed elevation benchmarks.
T o assess the relationship between accretion of surface sediment, 
vertical adjustment and sea-level rise in contemporary coastal wet-
lands, we used the SET-MH method (Fig. 2d; Methods). The SET-MH 
114 | Nature | Vol 621 | 7 September 2023
Article
uses a benchmark survey rod coupled with an introduced sediment 
horizon to assess the relationship between accretion and elevation 
gain32. SET-MH data in tidal marshes show that shallow subsidence (the 
difference between sediment accretion and elevation gain) increases 
with accretion rate and the rate of RSLR28,29. A previous analysis of a 
globally distributed network of 477 tidal marsh SET-MH stations showed 
that the increase in the subsidence rate with increasing accretion was 
non-linear29. For this reason, elevation deficits emerged under rates of 
RSLR similar to those inferred from the stratigraphic record29 (Fig. 2e 
and Extended Data Fig. 2). We repeated this Bayesian analysis for 190 
SET-MH installations in mangrove forests (Methods), estimating the 
cumulative probability of vertical adjustment at or exceeding the 
rate of RSLR at the SET-MH stations (Fig. 2f and Extended Data Fig. 2). 
The results were consistent with those for tidal marshes. We found 
that an elevation deficit at mangrove sites is very likely (P  > 0.9) at 
RSLR between 7 and 8 mm yr−1  (Fig. 2f), consistent with tidal marshes 
monitored using the same method (Fig. 2e). These observations con-
cur with the limits of tidal marsh and mangrove stability in relation to 
palaeo-RSLR as inferred from the stratigraphic record29 and described 
previously (Fig. 2a–c ).
Habitat change under current sea-level rise
As a third line of evidence, we assessed whether changes in the extent 
of tidal marsh and open water were consistent with RSLR and/or the 
deficit between RSLR and marsh vertical adjustment (Extended Data 
Fig. 3; Methods). Previous surveys of contemporary North American 
tidal marshes in low-to-moderate tidal range settings33 found that habi-
tat retreat commenced at a RSLR of 4 to 6 mm yr−1 . For example, the 
Maryland Eastern Shore is retreating34 under a long-term RSLR trend 
of around 6 mm yr−1 . In a comprehensive analysis of tidal marshes in the 
contiguous USA, gains in tidal marsh were found to be inversely related 
a
150° W 120° W9 0° W 60° W 30° W0 ° 30° E 60° E 90° E 120° E 150° E
60° N
30° N
0°
30° S
–5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Rate of RSLR (mm yr–1)
Belize
India
Western 
Australia
Queensland, 
Australia
Time (ka)
18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 98 76 54 32 10
c
Tidal marshes Mangroves Coral reefs
India
Queensland, Australia
Sahul Shelf and Western Australia
Queensland, Australia
Mangroves Reef islands
Belize
Florida
Barbados
Suriname
Benin
Vietnam
Zanzibar
b
7 mm yr–1
Belize
Western Australia
India
Florida
Benin
Coastal ecosytem
expansion
Suriname
Florida
Benin
Zanzibar
Sunda Shelf and Vietnam
Time (ka)
18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 98 76 54 32 10
Latitude
Longitude
Fig. 1 | Coastal ecosystem responses to RSLR following the Last Glacial 
Maximum.  a, Present-day distribution of mapped coastal ecosystems and the 
location of case studies highlighted in b ,c. b, Median rates of RSLR over time 
derived from GIA modelling (Methods). c , Timing of habitat advance and 
retreat for a selection of locations (Methods). Mangrove, tidal marsh and coral 
reef island development is predominantly associated with periods of RSLR of 
less than 7 mm yr
−1 .
Nature | Vol 621 | 7 September 2023 | 115
to RSLR, with some marsh loss associated with short-term perturba-
tions, notably hurricanes34. RSLR was also associated with reduced 
normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) values for vegetation 
adjacent to the marsh34, possibly resulting from saline water intrusion.
We used high-resolution global mapping of surface water change35 
and tidal wetland extent 36 in the immediate vicinity of tidal marsh 
SET-MH stations globally to determine the influence of contemporary 
RSLR, elevation capital and elevation deficit on marsh loss. Canopy 
cover obscured observations of surface water in mangroves. We found 
that tidal marsh sites were likely to show a trend towards increased 
presence of surface water (P > 0.66) once RSLR exceeded 2.3 mm yr−1  
(Extended Data Fig. 3). The frequency of surface water observations 
at marsh sites increased with both the rate of RSLR (r2 = 0.16, P < 0.001; 
Extended Data Fig. 4) and marsh elevation deficit (r2 = 0.14, P < 0.001; 
Extended Data Figs. 4 and 5). The relationship between surface water 
change and marsh elevation deficit was evident in lower elevation marsh 
sites (r2 = 0.20) rather than higher elevation sites (r2 = 0.03; Extended 
Data Fig. 5), illustrating the temporary resilience conferred by elevation 
capital. We also found a significant relationship between the proportion 
of tidal marsh conversion to open water habitat and RSLR (P = 0.018). 
Tidal marshes were as likely as not (P = 0.5) to be retreating as RSLR 
increased above 5.4 mm yr−1  (Extended Data Fig. 3), with relatively 
few marshes advancing. This estimate of retreat may be conservative 
because patches of interior marsh break-up may not have been iden-
tified (Methods). The ameliorating influence of elevation capital was 
also evident in the extent of marsh retreat. Where marshes had higher 
than the median elevation capital, there was no relationship between 
marsh retreat and RSLR (P = 0.850). At lower than the median elevation 
capital, the relationship was highly significant (P = 0.002).
There are relatively few data on the change to reef-top habitats. Sur-
veys of reef island planiform change in the tropical western Pacific 
and Indian Oceans have shown a remarkable degree of stability under 
rates of RSLR up to the contemporary GMSL rate 37,38. Our collation 
of existing data on reef island morphometric changes (n = 872) from 
the Indian and Pacific Oceans shows a higher probability of island 
contraction at rates of RSLR above the rate of contemporary GMSL 
rise (Methods; Extended Data Fig. 3c). Island size reduction is likely 
(P ≥ 0.66) at RSLR above 6.2 mm yr−1 . The rate of RSLR in the Solomon 
Islands has averaged between 7 and 10 mm yr−1  since 1994 (ref. 39), and 
in the exposed northern Isabel Province, five of the twenty vegetated 
reef islands have completely eroded, leaving dead mangrove trunks on 
hard coral40. A further six islands contracted by more than 20% in the 
Age
(ka)
Depth
(m)
Wetland
response
8.5–8.7
8.6–8.9
2.4
2.6
Mud/f_lat
Tidal
marsh
or
mangrove
Mud/f_lat
Wetland
drowning
Wetland
initiation
a
05 10
Probability of marsh drowning
–5
7.1 mm yr–1
0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Rate of RSLR (mm yr–1)
Median90% CI
f
4.6 mm yr–1
0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
–5 05 10
Median
Rate of RSLR (mm yr–1)
Probability of de/f_icit
7.6  mm yr–1
90% CI
d
/uni0394Elevation – RSLR rate =–5.4 mm yr–1
Elevation budget: De/f_icit
Shallow
subsidence 
Marker
horizon
Deep subsidencePoint of
 refusal 
Vertical
accretionWetland
surface
elevation
change:
 3.7 mm yr–1
Probability of mangrove initiation
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
Median95% CI
6.1 mm yr–1
Rate of RSLR (mm yr–1)
cb
0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
–5 05 10
Rate of RSLR (mm yr–1)
Probability of de/f_icit
7.9  mm yr–1
LithologyEnvironment
e
Surface elevation table
9.1 mm yr–1
RSLR rate:
Wetland surface
4.3 mm yr–1
4.3  mm yr–1
3.6  mm yr–1 3.1 mm yr–1
Median90% CI
24 6 8 10
Fig. 2 | Probability of vertical adjustment of mangrove and tidal marsh  
to rising sea levels. a– c, Palaeo-stratigraphic assessments ( a) of marsh 
adjustment or retreat for tidal marshes ( b) and the probability of the initiation 
of sustained mangrove vertical adjustment 12 (c), in relation to rates of RSLR 
encountered over the past 10,000 years. b, The red line represents minerogenic 
UK marshes15 and the orange line represents organic marshes of the Mississippi 
Delta14. d– f, Results in a– c are compared with vertical adjustment as assessed 
by the surface elevation table ( d), analysed for the probability of a deficit 
between vertical adjustment and RSLR for the same period of measurement, 
for 477 tidal marsh SET-MH installations 29 (e) and 190 mangrove SET-MH 
installations ( f). Adopting IPCC likelihood definitions (Methods), we indicate  
in each case the probability thresholds at which mangrove or marsh drowning 
becomes likely (P ≥ 0.66) or very likely (P ≥ 0.90). The corresponding histograms 
for each RSLR increment are shown in Extended Data Fig. 2. b ,c,e,f, The line 
represents the median and the shaded region shows 90% confidence interval (CI).
116 | Nature | Vol 621 | 7 September 2023
Article
period 1947–2014. These observations conform to RSLR thresholds 
modelled for the stability of reef islands in the Marshall Islands group 
based on palaeo sea-level reconstructions41. The reef islands in the 
western tropical Pacific provide insights into probable outcomes for 
intertidal wetland and supratidal islands on reef tops globally under 
conditions of accelerating RSLR projected to 2100.
Projected response to future sea-level rise
Modelling of spatial variability in RSLR was completed in the IPCC AR6 
for each warming scenario42. We compared regional RSLR projections 
to 2080–2100 with the distribution of mangroves, tidal marshes and 
coral reefs across the globe (Fig. 3; Methods). For each of the modelled 
scenarios, we determined the proportion of mangrove, tidal marsh 
and coral reef island habitat occurring where RSLR is projected to rise 
to levels for which eventual retreat of mangroves and tidal marshes 
is likely (4 mm yr−1 ) or very likely (7 mm yr−1 ), the best estimate from 
our combined palaeo and instrumental observations. For reef islands  
(a subset of mapped reefs), contraction or increasing island instability  
by RSLR of 7 mm yr−1  is likely (Extended Data Fig. 2c), although we  
cannot yet specify a rate of RSLR at which contraction is highly likely, 
given the scarcity of contemporary observations at higher rates of 
RSLR, and because this threshold will vary with the rate of surround-
ing reef vertical growth, reef flat width, wave exposure, island size and 
height, and reef-derived sediment supply.
In the 1.5 °C scenario, the likely (P ≥ 0.66) rate of GMSL rise at 2080–
2100 is between 2.4 and 6.4 mm yr−1 . Coastlines subject to rates of RSLR 
of 4 to 7 mm yr−1  correspond to centres 