Annals of Botany 125: 213–234, 2020
doi: 10.1093/aob/mcz161, available online at www.academic.oup.com/aob
Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Annals of Botany Company 2019. This work is 
written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain in the US.
Tropical cyclones and the organization of mangrove forests: a review
Ken W. Krauss* ,  and Michael J. Osland
U.S. Geological Survey, Wetland and Aquatic Research Center, 700 Cajundome Blvd, Lafayette, LA, USA
*For correspondence. E-mail kraussk@usgs.gov
Received: 9 March 2019 Returned for revision: 5 August 2019 Editorial decision: 25 September 2019 Accepted: 3 October 2019 
Published electronically 11 October 2019
• Background Many mangrove ecosystems are periodically exposed to high velocity winds and surge from trop-
ical cyclones, and often recover with time and continue to provide numerous societal benefits in the wake of storm 
events.
• Scope This review focuses on the drivers and disturbance mechanisms (visible and functional) that tropical cyc-
lones of various intensities have on mangrove ecosystem properties around the world, as well as the potential eco-
system services role offered by mangroves along storm-ravaged coastlines. When viewed together, studies describe 
repeatable types of impact and a variety of responses of mangroves that make them ecologically resilient to high 
velocity winds, and which have served to advance the notion that mangroves are disturbance-adapted ecosystems.
• Conclusions Studies have documented massive tree mortality and forest structural shifts as well as high vari-
ability of spatial effects associated with proximity and direction of the tropical cyclone trajectory that influence 
biogeochemical processes, recovery of individual trees, and forest regeneration and succession. Mangroves pro-
vide coastal protection through surge and wind suppression during tropical cyclones, and yet are able to overcome 
wind effects and often recover unless some alternative environmental stress is at play (e.g. hydrological alteration 
or sedimentation). Structural elements of mangroves are influenced by the legacies imposed by past tropical cyc-
lone injury, which affect their current appearance, and presumably their function, at any point in time. However, 
much is yet to be discovered about the importance of the effects of tropical cyclones on these fascinating botanical 
ecosystems, including the role of storm-based sediment subsidies, and much more effort will be needed to predict 
future recovery patterns as the frequency and intensity of tropical cyclones potentially change.
Key words: Mangrove wetlands, hurricane, regeneration, storm visible effects, surge, tropical storm, typhoon, 
recovery.
INTRODUCTION
Mangrove ecosystems occur throughout many tropical, sub-
tropical and warm temperate regions of the world, and represent 
a unique botanical community comprised of a number of dis-
tinctive growth forms (Tomlinson, 2016). Mangroves have even 
expanded their distribution within warm temperate locations glo-
bally, facilitated by a prolonged post-Pleistocene recolonization 
period (Sherrod and McMillan, 1985; Woodroffe and Grindrod, 
1991; Kennedy et  al., 2016), accentuated by higher minimum 
winter temperatures at progressively higher latitudes over the late 
Holocene and Anthropocene (Osland et al., 2013; Saintilan et al., 
2014). Taxonomically, mangroves are comprised of approx. 70 
species or putative hybrids (Duke et al., 1998), and include tree, 
shrub, fern and palm life forms, collectively creating the potential 
for structural adaptability and resilience to major disturbances. In 
a recent review, 45 % of reported disturbances to mangrove area 
in the global literature were attributed to tropical cyclones (Sippo 
et al., 2018), ranking tropical cyclones as perhaps the top non-
anthropogenic disturbance they must endure.
Tropical cyclone effects on mangrove ecosystems, while 
disruptive, are often not long lived, as some tree species can 
re-sprout quickly (e.g. Avicennia), while others rely on advance 
regeneration strategies (e.g. seedlings present prior to storm 
events) or post-storm seeding. Mangroves are described as 
disturbance-adapted communities (Lugo et al., 1981) and are 
often considered ecologically stable (Alongi, 2008), suggesting 
that they are able to take on structural disruptions from peri-
odic storms and recover. Where tropical cyclone disturbance 
frequency is more intense (e.g. parts of the Caribbean region), 
mangrove structural complexity is reduced to lower statured 
canopies with few canopy emergents (Lugo and Snedaker, 
1974). Where cyclone disturbance is rare (e.g. some Pacific is-
lands, Panama), structural biomass and complexity can increase 
over time (Allen et al., 2001; Simard et al., 2019).
However, when the complexity of a mangrove is com-
promised by environmental modifications, especially those 
influencing tidal hydrological boundaries and characteris-
tics, resistance to tropical cyclone disturbance is also com-
promised, making individual cyclone events potentially more 
impactful (V ogt et al., 2012; Lewis et al., 2016). Initial system 
properties matter tremendously, such that tropical cyclones 
with similar meteorological metrics affect the same mangrove 
REVIEW: PART OF A SPECIAL ISSUE ON COASTAL FLOODING AND STORM RISKS
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
214
forest differently based on conditions imposed by past disturb-
ance (Peters et al., 2011). The legacy of past tropical cyclone 
disturbance and recovery in mangroves often defines the cur -
rent ecosystem state, and this disturbance legacy is part of the 
ecology of mangrove forests in many locations.
Science programmes and policies have targeted mangrove 
ecosystems over the last few decades as structural protection 
afforded to coastal communities from wind, surge and tsunamis 
have become more evident (Danielsen et al., 2005; Dahdouh-
Guebas et al., 2005; Das and Vincent, 2009). Along with pro-
tection for humans living in disturbance-prone environments, 
additional incentives for mangrove conservation related to 
carbon storage and flux have emerged as mangroves have also 
been identified as important components of the global carbon 
cycle (Bouillon et al., 2008; Donato et al., 2011). Because of 
these values attributed to mangroves, protection, rehabilitation 
and restoration activities have helped to reduce global man-
grove area losses on an annual basis from the 1970s to the pre-
sent (Friess et al., 2019). While this is seemingly good news, 
reports are nuanced by very high annual mangrove losses in 
specific regions (e.g. Indonesia, Malaysia and Myanmar; Feller 
et al., 2017), and an uncertain future for mangroves with cli-
mate change (Ward et  al., 2016). In some regions, climate 
change is expected to increase the frequency of the most intense 
tropical cyclones, increase the amount of rainfall produced by 
tropical cyclones near the cyclone centre and increase the pole-
ward distribution of tropical cyclones (Knutson et  al., 2010, 
2015; Christensen et al., 2013; Sobel et al., 2016; Kossin et al. 
2017; Patricola and Wehner, 2018).
Tropical cyclones affect nearly every aspect of the ecosystem 
services that mangroves provide; for example, in protecting in-
frastructure, in provisioning of wildlife habitat and in carbon 
sequestration. Yet, storm influences on this ecosystem have not 
received comprehensive review. Here, we will define tropical 
cyclones, explain where they occur, describe their influences on 
mangrove ecosystem properties and relevant disturbance mech-
anisms, and describe cyclone–mangrove interactions with surge 
suppression, sea-level rise and climate change. We will end this 
review with a conceptual diagram detailing mechanistically 
what it means to be ‘disturbance-adapted’ and suggest avenues 
for impactful future tropical cyclone research on mangroves.
DEFINING TROPICAL CYCLONES
Across the world, tropical cyclones are described using sev-
eral different names and classification systems. As a result, the 
literature describing cyclone effects on mangrove forests uses 
different terms that are location dependent (e.g. hurricane, ty-
phoon or cyclone). Hurricane is the name used for powerful 
tropical cyclones (i.e. winds speeds that exceed 119 km h
–1) 
in the Atlantic Ocean and north-eastern Pacific Ocean. In con-
trast, typhoon is used to describe powerful tropical cyclones 
in the north-western Pacific Ocean. In the Indian Ocean and 
south-western Pacific Ocean, powerful tropical cyclones are 
called tropical cyclones, with the addition of a location-specific 
modifier to indicate intensity (e.g. severe or very intense). In 
many areas, less powerful tropical cyclones are called trop-
ical depressions (low wind speeds) or tropical storms (mod-
erate wind speeds). Cyclone classification systems typically 
use maximum sustained wind speeds to designate classifica-
tion categories. For example, the Saffir–Simpson hurricane 
wind scale uses wind speeds to categorize hurricanes into five 
groups (nhc.noaa.gov): Category 1 (119–153 km h
–1), Category 
2 (154–177 km h –1), Category 3 (178–208 km h –1), Category 
4 (209–251 km h –1) and Category 5 (≥252 km h –1). In this re-
view, we use the term ‘tropical cyclone’ in a general manner. 
However, when referring to intensity, we typically use the 
Saffir–Simpson categories.
WHERE DO TROPICAL CYCLONES AFFECT 
MANGROVES?
There are many regions of the world where mangrove forests 
are never affected by tropical cyclones due to climatic condi-
tions that prevent tropical cyclone formation (Fig. 1; note the 
blue areas not crossed by red, orange or yellow tropical cyclone 
tracks). For example, tropical cyclones rarely affect mangrove 
forests in Africa, South America, Indonesia and Papua New 
Guinea. In contrast, there are certain cyclonic hot spots, where 
mangrove forests are greatly influenced by recurrent tropical 
cyclones (Fig. 1; note the blue areas surrounded by red, orange 
and yellow cyclone tracks). Hamilton and Casey (2016) pro-
vided a ranked list of the 20 countries with the largest mangrove 
areas. Our global map of tropical cyclone pathways (Fig. 1) 
indicates that the following seven of these 20 mangrove-rich 
countries are also affected by tropical cyclones: Australia, 
Mexico, Myanmar, Philippines, Bangladesh, Cuba and the 
USA (ranked in descending order according to mangrove area). 
In terms of aerial cover, these are the seven countries where the 
effects of tropical cyclones on mangroves are potentially lar -
gest. However, in terms of local effects, there are many smaller 
countries (e.g. Bahamas, Guadeloupe, Honduras, Belize and 
Haiti) where mangrove forest effects can be large due to their 
position within common cyclonic pathways.
INFLUENCES ON SYSTEM PROPERTIES
General descriptions of structural effects on forests from max-
imum sustained winds of specific intensities from tropical cyc-
lones have been developed (Myers and van Lear, 1998). We 
have modified those for application to mangroves (Table 1). 
While difficulties arise when generalizing effects because of 
variation in geomorphology, tornadic wind downbursts, man-
grove forest height and stand condition, two things should be 
noted from this table.
First, tropical cyclones with Category 3 windspeeds or higher 
(≥178 km h
–1) cause extreme visible effects on mangroves, al-
most without exception. Mangroves are positioned in wet soils 
and many species have dense wood (Chapman, 1976). Critical 
wind speeds >178 km h
–1 often force tip-ups along with more 
prominent breakage of large trees (Roth, 1992; Aung et  al., 
2013), which subsequently fall on small trees and break them. 
In spite of this, smaller trees and saplings missed by falling 
trees and branches, and sometimes inundated by storm surge, 
can survive cyclones. Thus, smaller statured mangrove forests 
and trees in canopy gaps can appear more resistant to structural 
effects because they are positioned lower within the vertical 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
215
boundary layer to allow some wind buffering (Smith et  al., 
1994). However, if Category 4 wind speeds (>210 km h –1) or 
higher are realized, dominant forest trees are often laid down 
(broken or tipped-up) and buffering of smaller trees from the 
wind is no longer ensured. While smaller statured forests may 
appear less affected than taller forests at windspeeds of 178–
208 km h
–1, post-storm recovery may be slower in forests with 
reduced growth potential.
Secondly, visible tropical cyclone effects on mangroves can 
be striking before they become extreme (Fig. 2A, B). The phys-
ical change imposed by storm-generated surges vs. the protec-
tion provided by complete submergence from surge can lead 
to swathes of visible effects in some fringing locations but not 
others, confounding spatial resolution of impact. While damage 
to built structures might even be light in some cases, injury to 
mangroves, especially those in poor condition prior to the cyc-
lone (Odum and Johannes, 1975; Lewis et al., 2016), can be 
overwhelming to the casual observer (Fig. 2C). Thus, reactions 
are often negative (Smith et al., 1994), but herein we offer con-
text; most mangroves within the repetitive storm-track areas 
shown in Fig. 1 have sustained cyclone impacts previously, and 
they have already recovered to what they are now. When left in 
their natural and unaltered state, mangroves often recover from 
tropical cyclones.
Tree mortality
Tree mortality was 25–100 % over a mangrove area of approx. 
40 000 ha from Hurricane Donna, which made landfall in south 
Florida in 1960 (Craighead and Gilbert, 1962). Likewise, man-
grove tree mortality from tropical cyclone events ranged from 
zero to 100 % among published accounts since (Table 2). Tree 
mortality can continue for months (delayed mortality) after a 
cyclone makes landfall (Smith et al., 1994), so post-assessment 
dates need to be considered. Notable among mortality accounts 
are the muddled correlations between the intensity of a tropical 
cyclone based on simple descriptors (e.g. maximum sustained 
wind speeds) and realized mortality in any specific mangrove 
stand. For example, mortality ranged from 0 to 86 % from 
Typhoon Haiyan as it affected the Philippines with some of the 
strongest winds ever recorded in mangroves (Primavera et al., 
2016). Structural complexity, hydrogeomorphic setting, ante-
cedent environmental change, orographic positioning and angle 
of cyclone trajectory relative to forest location generate a spatial 
signature of response to (or effects of) tropical cyclones that not 
only translates into differences in recovery and regeneration, 
but also confounds cause–effect predictability. That a single 
site in Primavera et al. (2016) registered no visible effects from 
such an intense storm is notable. Modelling has sorted some of 
this complexity by incorporating better storm wind character -
istics at finer resolutions (e.g. Doyle and Girod, 1997), but it is 
clear that generalizing degrees of responses from tropical cyc-
lones should be cautioned.
Differences in tolerances among mangrove species to wind 
throw also contribute to disparity of effects. This is expected, as 
tropical cyclones are not considered a stressor per se, but rather 
wind, rain, surge and excessive sedimentation are the stressors, 
and those are spatially delivered in vastly different ways during 
tropical cyclone events. Among neotropical mangroves, histor-
ical accounts suggested that Laguncularia racemosa was more 
susceptible to tropical cyclone effects than Rhizophora mangle 
(Wadsworth and Englerth, 1959); however, this trend has not 
always held up in the greater Caribbean region (Table 2).  
Accounts of differential tree species mortality from Cyclone 
Nargis, which affected the Ayeyarwady Delta in Myanmar as 
a Category 3 storm, were much more distinct than the multiple 
accounts from the Caribbean region. Bruguiera sexangula and 
Rhizophora apiculata trees experienced >90 % mortality, while 
mortality was far less for Excoecaria agallocha, Sonneratia 
caseolaris, Heritiera fomes and Avicennia officinalis, all of 
which had >85 % survival (Aung et al., 2013). Results from the 
Caribbean region suggest that the characteristics of the cyclone 
vs. site conditions greatly influence species-ranked suscepti-
bility outcomes during tropical cyclones (Table 2). In contrast, 
results from the old world tropics generally support suggestions 
150°W
30°N
0°
30°S
Saffir–Simpson hurricane
Wind scale category
Mangrove12 34 5
120°W 90°W 60°W 30°W 30°E 60°E 90°E 120°E 150°E 180°0°
Fig. 1. Global distribution of tropical cyclone storm tracks in the northern and southern hemispheres along with Saffir–Simpson scale 
categories. The distribution of mangroves is depicted by blue shading (from Giri et  al., 2011), and reveals those mangrove areas that are subjected to 
tropical cyclone impact on a recurring basis. Saffir–Simpson scale wind speeds are as follows: Category 1, 119–153 km h–1; Category 2, 154–177 km h–1; Category 
3, 178–208 km h–1; Category 4, 209–251 km h–1; Category 5, ≥252 km h–1. Tropical cyclone track data are from Knapp et al. (2010).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
216
Table 1. Generalized mangrove forest damage descriptions relative to Saffir–Simpson tropical cyclone intensity ratings  
(after Myers and van Lear, 1998).
Category Wind speed, km h–1 Description
1 119–153 (74–95 miles h–1) Shrubby mangroves, trees and foliage are damaged, but lightly, with few being fully susceptible to mortality 
through stem breakage or tip-ups. Litter and small branch fall limited to weaker structures or species with less 
dense wood, and is probably compensatory to what would fall ordinarily in the coming months. Seedlings and 
saplings with minor damage, but not generally from wind vs. woody debris, tree/branch fall and surge. Surge 
to 1.2–1.5 m above normal. Wrack deposition limited but notable, probably containing re-deposited mangrove 
seeds (when applicable) and propagules. Sedimentation low with minimal contributions from re-suspended 
estuarine components. Coastal built structures (e.g. piers and signs) sustain minor damage. Roads that are low 
lying are inundated, especially if storm impacts at high tide. No peat collapse expected after the storm.
2 154–177 (96–110 miles h
–1) Shrubby mangroves, trees and foliage damaged considerably, with many large trees blown down through stem 
snapping (especially trees of lighter wood densities) and tip-ups. Litter and branch fall extensive and includes 
compensatory and additive components to what would fall ordinarily in the coming months. Seedlings 
and saplings with moderate damage, sustaining only small portion of that damage from wind vs. woody 
debris, tree/branch fall and surge. Surge to 1.8–2.4 m above normal. Wrack deposition extensive, containing 
re-deposited mangrove seeds (when applicable), propagules, wood, seagrass, shells, human-sourced debris, 
etc. Sedimentation moderate and would include re-suspended estuarine components, especially if surrounding 
estuaries are shallow (<2–3 m deep). Considerable damage to coastal built structures, with many roads being 
inundated 2–4 h in advance of the approaching storm. Peat collapse expected after the storm only in forests of 
lower productivity from previous human impact.
3 178–208 (111–130 miles h
–1) Mangroves of all sizes highly susceptible to wind fall as they reach a wind velocity threshold established by 
Category 3 designation (Doyle et al., 1995), especially species with lighter wood densities; nearly all large 
trees blown down or snapped, and smaller trees and shrubs sustaining moderate to heavy damage, often having 
damage to vascular structures if they do not break. Litter and branches ripped from trees, with extensive 
additive volumes of debris fall, affecting growth phenology of surviving mangrove trees into the next few 
growing seasons. Seedlings with moderate damage and saplings with heavy damage from wind, woody debris, 
tree/branch fall and surge. Surge to 2.7–3.6 m above normal. Wrack deposition extensive, containing similar 
elements to Category 2 storms but also including larger debris (e.g. trees) and larger human-sourced debris 
capable of physically damaging the mangrove forest. Sedimentation extensive (up to 40 mm) from upland, 
resuspended and autochthonous sources capable of covering emergent root lenticels. Great damage to coastal 
built structures, with debris from that damage infiltrating mangrove forests from wind throw and water. Most 
roads are inundated 3–5 h in advance of the approaching storm. Peat collapse expected in some forests after 
the storm, and imminent in forests of lower productivity from previous human impact.
4 2109–251 (131–155 miles h
–1) All trees are affected extensively, with most trees and shrubs blown down or snapped, and saplings and smaller 
trees often sheared off (Craighead and Gilbert, 1962) in lieu of simply sustaining damage to vascular 
structures. Canopy loss of foliage and small branches extensive, both leading to delayed mortality of small 
surviving trees from foliage loss and affecting growth phenology for surviving mangrove trees into the 
next few growing seasons. Seedlings and saplings with moderate to heavy damage from all sources, often 
having to re-adjust to post-storm light intensities through new leaf development in order to ensure survival. 
Surge to 3.9–5.5 m above normal, submerging small statured mangrove forests aligning fringe locations 
with ocean water and serving (paradoxically) to buffer those small trees from wind damage in some cases. 
Terrestrial flooding extending to approx. 10 km inland. Wrack deposition extensive, containing similar 
elements to Category 2 storms but also including larger debris (e.g. trees) and larger human-sourced debris 
that physically damages the mangrove forest. Sedimentation even more extensive (up to 40–60 mm) from 
upland, resuspended and autochoctanous sources capable of covering emergent root lenticels and, in some 
cases, facilitating deposition of intact sections of soil from nearby damaged wetlands on top of the forest 
floor. Catastrophic damage to coastal built structures (including many homes), with debris from that damage 
infiltrating mangrove forests from wind throw and water. Roads are inundated 3–5 h in advance of the 
approaching storm. Beach erosion extensive, with new channels being forged through creeks and barrier 
islands, especially those areas without significant mangrove colonization. Peat collapse imminent after storm.
5 ≥252 (> 155 miles h
–1) Catastrophic damage incurred by mangrove forests, with 90–100 % destruction being noted in eyewall and 
immediate right quadrat areas in the northern hemisphere or left quadrat areas in the southern hemisphere. 
Shrubby mangroves, trees and saplings destroyed with only a few remaining seedlings, probably damaged 
by debris falling from broken canopies and debris in surge. Surge to >5.5 m above normal, submerging 
small statured mangrove forests aligning fringe locations with ocean water and serving (paradoxically) to 
buffer trees from wind damage in some cases. Terrestrial flooding extending to approx. 16 km inland. Wrack 
deposition extensive, containing similar elements to Category 2 storms but also including larger debris (e.g. 
trees) and larger human-sourced debris that physically damages the mangrove forest. Sedimentation extensive 
(>60 mm) from upland, resuspended and autochoctanous sources capable of covering lenticels on large 
segments of prop roots and entire pneumatophore structures, and facilitating deposition of intact sections of 
soil from nearby damaged wetlands deposited on top of the forest floor. Catastrophic damage to coastal built 
structures (including many homes, municipal structures and roads), with debris from that damage infiltrating 
mangrove forests from wind throw and water. Roads are inundated 4–7 h in advance of the approaching storm. 
Extensive beach erosion with and without established vegetation, with new channel formation through barrier 
islands and mangrove forests. Extensive surge and wave scouring evident, undermining mangrove roots. Peat 
collapse guaranteed after storm.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
217
by Woodroffe and Grime (1999) that mangrove species in the 