Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Priority areas to protect mangroves and
maximise ecosystem services
Alvise Dabalà 1,2,3 , Farid Dahdouh-Guebas 2,3,4,5,D a n i e lC .D u n n1,6,
Jason D. Everett 1,7,8, Catherine E. Lovelock 1,4, Jeffrey O. Hanson 9,
Kristine Camille V. Buenafe 1,6,7,S a n d r aN e u b e r t1,6,10 &
Anthony J. Richardson1,6,7
Anthropogenic activities threaten global biodiversity and ecosystem services.
Yet, area-based conservation efforts typically target biodiversity protection
whilst minimising conﬂict with economic activities, failing to consider eco-
system services. Here we identify priority areas that maximise both the pro-
tection of mangrove biodiversity and their ecosystem services. We reveal that
d e s p i t e1 3 . 5 %o ft h em a n g r o v ed i s t r i b u t i on being currently strictly protected,
all mangrove species are not adequately represented and many areas that
provide disproportionally large ecosystem services are missed. Optimising the
placement of future conservation efforts to protect 30% of global mangroves
potentially safeguards an additional 16.3billion USD of coastal property value,
6.1 million people, 1173.1 Tg C, and 50.7 million ﬁsher days yr
−1.O u r ﬁndings
suggest that there is a pressing need for including ecosystem services in
protected area design and that strategic prioritisation and coordination of
mangrove conservation could provide substantial beneﬁts to human
wellbeing.
Ecosystems provide many services to humanity, including food pro-
visioning, air and water puri ﬁcation and climate change mitigation 1.
These ecosystem services are threatened by global biodiversity loss
caused by anthropogenic activities such as urbanisation, agriculture
and ﬁshing
2. In 2011, a total of 194 countries agreed, via the Convention
of Biological Diversity Aichi Target 11, that by 2020 they would protect
at least 17% of their terrestrial systems and inland waters, and 10% of
their coastal zones and marine regions, by implementing protected
areas and other effective area-based conservation measures
3.D e s p i t e
failing to meet these targets, the ﬁrst draft of the post-2020 Global
Biodiversity Framework calls for 30% of the Earth to be protected to
conserve biodiversity and enhance nature ’s contribution to people
through ecosystem services4.
Historically, conservation has neglected ecosystem services 5.
Although efforts have been made to calculate the value of ecosystem
services provided by nature (e.g., Costanza et al. 6;C o s t a n z ae ta l .7),
data on ecosystem services are rarely included in conservation plans.
Most studies focus on adequately representing biodiversity whilst
minimising conﬂict with economic activities, such as avoiding popu-
lation centres, arable land or valuable ﬁshing areas
8,9. However,
Received: 9 September 2022
Accepted: 30 August 2023
Check for updates
1School of the Environment, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD, Australia.2Systems Ecology and Resource Management Research Unit (SERM),
Department of Organism Biology, Université Libre de Bruxelles - ULB, Av. F.D. Roosevelt 50, CPi 264/1, 1050 Brussels, Belgium.3Ecology & Biodiversity,
Laboratory of Plant Biology and Nature Management, Biology Department, Vrije Universiteit Brussel - VUB, Pleinlaan 2, VUB-APNA-WE, 1050 Brussels,Belgium.
4Mangrove Specialist Group (MSG), Species Survival Commission (SSC), International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), Zoological Societyo f
London, London, UK.5Interfaculty Institute of Social-Ecological Transitions, Université Libre de Bruxelles - ULB, Av. F.D. Roosevelt 50, 1050 Brussels, Belgium.
6Centre for Biodiversity and Conservation Science (CBCS), The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD, Australia.7Commonwealth Scientiﬁca n dI n d u s t r i a l
Research Organization (CSIRO) Environment, Queensland Biosciences Precinct (QBP), St Lucia, QLD, Australia.8Centre for Marine Science and Innovation
(CMSI), The University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.9Department of Biology, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada.10Institute of Computer
Science, Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany. e-mail: alvise.dab@gmail.com
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
recently there has been increasing interest in designing spatial plan-
ning approaches to maintain and enhance ecosystem services10–13.F o r
example, Jung et al. 10 used spatial prioritisation to identify areas on
land that protect both biodiversity and ecosystem services such as
carbon sequestration and freshwater provision. Sievers et al.13 identi-
ﬁed areas of co-occurrence of mangrove biodiversity and ecosystem
services. Similarly, Sala et al. 12 identiﬁed co-bene ﬁts in the ocean,
concentrating on protecting biodiversity whilst minimising carbon
remineralisation from trawling and maximising ﬁsheries bene ﬁts,
although aspects of that analysis have been criticised
14.A tl o c a la n d
regional scale, the same trend is observed, with multiple studies
including ecosystem services in their analysis or evaluating trade-offs
between ecosystem services
15–17. Despite this increasing interest, few
studies have identi ﬁed priority areas in coastal systems for safe-
guarding biodiversity and ecosystem services.
Mangroves are at the interface between the land and the sea,
providing several key ecosystem services18,19. The complex system of
roots and branches of mangroves helps protect coastal populations
and properties from ﬂooding, strong winds and extreme weather
20,21.
Mangrove roots also reduce erosion and increase accretion, promot-
ing stabilisation and establishment of coastal soil
20.A d d i t i o n a l l y ,
mangroves store carbon over the short term in their biomass and over
the long term in sediments
22. The carbon storage of mangroves
(0.096 Tg C km−2) is greater than that of other ecosystems on land
(rainforests 0.024 Tg C km−2; peat swamps 0.041 Tg C km−2)a n di nt h e
sea (saltmarshes 0.059 Tg C km −2; seagrasses 0.014 Tg C km −2)22.
Finally, the high productivity and physical complexity of mangrove
ecosystems make them important nursery grounds for many com-
mercial and non-commercial ﬁsh and invertebrate species, providing
employment and food for millions of people
23. Although in the current
analysis we focused on these ecosystem services (i.e., coastal protec-
tion, carbon storage and nursery grounds for ﬁsheries), mangroves
provide many other services, including tourism, wood and non-timber
forest products, recreation, socio-cultural services and waterﬁltration
and several disservices (negative effects of nature on people), includ-
ing those related to health, safety and security, leisure and recreation,
and materials (see Dahdouh-Guebas et al.
18 for more details). Although
mangroves clearly provide substantial bene ﬁts to people, priority
areas for protection to conserve biodiversity and ecosystem services
have not been identiﬁed globally.
Here we: (1) assess how well current protected areas represent
mangrove biodiversity and ecosystem services; (2) identify areas that,
if ef ﬁciently protected, could ensure the conservation of mangrove
biodiversity and the most ecosystem services, while selecting the
smallest area possible and (3) identify priority areas that could be
considered for the expansion of current mangrove protection. Tar-
geting protection in these areas of high biodiversity and ecosystem
services could provide substantial social, ecological and economic
beneﬁts
24, supporting coastal communities and livelihoods. Protection
of mangrove ecosystems has many positive effects, including species
conservation, preservation of carbon sinks, and enhanced spillover
effects leading to increased catch outside of protected areas
25,26.A r e a -
based conservation efforts can protect mangroves from clearing 27,
maintain the ecosystem services provided, and enhance resilience to
climate change
11,28. Our analysis considers ecosystem services, includ-
ing coastal protection to reduce future disaster risk21, carbon storage
to preserve carbon sinks and future carbon sequestration 29,30,a n d
ﬁsheries beneﬁts to guarantee food security for local communities 31.
To evaluate the beneﬁto fm a n g r o v e st oﬁsheries, our approach does
not consider the closure of ocean areas from ﬁshing but just the pro-
tection of mangroves from clearing to preserve their functioning and
the increase in catches that result. Importantly, the focus on ecosystem
services, rather than concentrating on minimising potential economic
conﬂicts with industry, seeks to prioritise bene ﬁts to local people.
Although global conservation analyses have been criticised for poor
performance at local scales
32, and lack of consideration of impacts on
local livelihoods and data justice issues33, we believe there is utility in
undertaking prioritisation at multiple scales34, from both a community-
driven and scientiﬁc perspective35. While the current study does not
purport to direct management at local scales, it could provide several
insights: guidance on how we are meeting societal goals and identi-
fying gaps in mangrove conservation; highlighting potential advan-
tages of mangrove conservation to many nations; informing priorities
and resources deployed by non-Governmental organisations; and sti-
mulating local and regional spatial planning with informed and prior
consultation of local stakeholders including indigenous peoples
36,37.
Using the prioritizr R package 38, we generated spatial prioritisa-
tions based on mangrove ecosystem service data from the best avail-
able global datasets
21,29–31. The prioritisations maximised the
protection of 65 mangrove species (see “Methods” section). The ana-
lysis was conducted on hexagonal planning units with a spatial reso-
lution of 20-km alongshore. Because there is no accepted deﬁnition of
what constitutes protection, we have used two separate deﬁnitions for
existing protection based on the IUCN categories in the World Data-
base on Protected Areas (WDPA)
39: strictly protected areas based on
IUCN categories I-IV; and less strictly protected areas based on all IUCN
categories from I to VI and unclassi ﬁed areas. Our prioritisations
ensured ecological representation by including ﬁne-scale maps of
mangrove cover from Global Mangrove Watch
40 at 25 m resolution,
intersected with mangrove species distributions from IUCN 41.T o
account for the variability in structure, height, and species diversity of
mangroves across different climates, tidal amplitudes and geomorphic
settings, we split the species distribution of each of the 65 mangrove
species across the biophysical typologies
42 and marine provinces of
the world43, resulting in 944 sub-species distributions each assigned a
speciﬁc conservation target. We assigned conservation targets (i.e., the
minimum area to protect for each species) based on the area of the
global distribution of mangrove species using a log
10-linear inter-
polation following Rodrigues et al.44 (see “Methods” section). Hence,
species with larger distribution ranges were assigned lower targets
than those with smaller ranges.
We ﬁrst examined the adequacy of existing protected areas for
conserving mangroves. We calculated ecosystem services provided by
mangroves in protected areas as the sum of the values provided by
previous studies
21,29–31. We then ran three series of prioritisations
optimised for the selection of areas that provide substantial beneﬁts in
terms of safeguarding biodiversity and associated ecosystem services.
These prioritisations were constrained by incremental area budgets
(i.e., the maximum area that can be selected) from 1% to 100% of the
current mangrove extent globally. This generated a nested set of
priority areas for protection, with each planning unit in the analysis
assigned a rank depending on when it was selected. Planning units with
ranks closer to one represent more important areas to biodiversity and
ecosystem services at the global scale. To assess the value of including
ecosystem services in the analysis, we then compared the results with a
prioritisation optimised for biodiversity protection only. We also ran
weighted prioritisations that favoured the selection of areas that pro-
vide more ecosystem services over areas that are important for bio-
diversity but provide fewer services (see“Methods” section). We then
analysed the efﬁciency (i.e., percentage of targets reached and amount
of ecosystem services provided per area of mangroves protected) of
these prioritisations.
Results
Coverage of biodiversity and ecosystem services in current
protected areas
The current global system of strictly protected area covers 13.5% of the
distribution of mangroves globally (Supplementary Fig. 1). This
increases to 43% of the global distribution of mangroves protected
when we also include protected areas under IUCN categories V, VI, and
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 2
those unclassiﬁed (Supplementary Fig. 2). Considering strictly pro-
tected areas, the coverage protected varies regionally: greatest pro-
tection is in the Americas (24.7%), with less protection in Oceania
(11.1%), Asia (10.9%) and Africa (3.5%; Fig. 1a). Currently, 11 countries
protect >70% of their mangrove area, including Taiwan (83.0%) and the
USA (77.5%), but 67 countries protect <10% of their mangroves,
including Vietnam (2.8%) and Thailand (<1%). Considering the top-10
countries with the greatest mangrove area, protection levels were
lower than the global mean coverage in Brazil (12.9%), Malaysia (8.8%),
India (<1%), Myanmar (<1%), Nigeria (<1%) and Papua New Guinea (<1%);
but higher in Mexico (21.2%), Australia (18.0%), Indonesia (16.1%) and
Bangladesh (14.5%). Similar results were observed at the continental
scale when we considered all protected areas, with greatest protection
in the Americas (72.4%) compared to other continents (~30%; Supple-
mentary Fig. 3). However, we observed a large variation at the country
scale, with 27 countries that protect >70% of their mangroves and 23
that protect <10%. This is the result of many countries having pro-
tected areas that are not strictly protected. For example, there is a
large increase in the mangroves considered protected in Brazil, from
12.9% under IUCN categories I-IV to 88.7% under all IUCN protection
categories. Further, the mean area of mangrove patches in strictly
protected planning units is 36% higher than in unprotected mangrove
units. This could be due to the preferential protection of areas with
more mangroves, which could potentially miss the protection of small
mangrove patches, or to higher deforestation and fragmentation in
mangroves outside protected areas.
Mangroves inside existing protected areas provide extensive
ecosystem services in different countries: greatest values of property
currently safeguarded from ﬂooding are in Taiwan (7.8 billion USD)
and Mexico (2.9 billion USD; Fig. 1b); the most people safeguarded
from ﬂooding are in Vietnam (0.25 million people) and Taiwan (0.17
million people; Fig. 1c); the greatest carbon is stored in Indonesia
(324.4 Tg C) and the USA (82.1 Tg C; Fig. 1d); and the most ﬁshers
supported by mangroves are in Indonesia (3.4 million ﬁsher days
year
−1) and Bangladesh (2.2 million ﬁsher days yr−1;F i g .1e).
A variable percentage of each ecosystem service is conserved in
the 13.5% of global mangrove distribution that is currently in protected
areas (Fig. 1b–e). Coastal property values are well represented in the
current system, which protects 24.9% of the total value globally
(amounting to 12.0 billion USD), and stored carbon is moderately well
represented, protecting 14.5% (980.8 Tg C). However, only 6.8% of the
total number of people near mangroves are safeguarded fromﬂooding
(0.64 million people), and 6.2% of the total ﬁsheries beneﬁt is pro-
tected (11.1 millionﬁsher days yr
−1). It is clear that the current system of
strictly protected areas was not developed to optimise protection
across all ecosystem services but avoided areas where large popula-
tions live.
Protection of global mangrove priority areas for biodiversity
and ecosystem services
When the current network of protected areas is ignored, global
mangrove priority areas identi ﬁed for protection ef ﬁciently max-
imise the combination of biodiversity and ecosystem services
(Fig. 2). These priority areas are broadly distributed (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 4a), but most high-priority areas (i.e., top-ranked 10% of
mangrove areas) are in Asia (75.4% of the mangrove area; Fig. 2b, e)
and Oceania (17.9%; Fig. 2d). This is a consequence of their high
mangrove species richness (Supplementary Fig. 5) and high levels of
ecosystem services (Supplementary Fig. 6). When we extend the
analysis to the mid-priority areas (i.e., top-ranked 30% of mangrove
areas), the selection was more-evenly distributed globally, with
additional mangroves selected in the Americas (26.4%) and Africa
(6.9%). There were also many mid-priority areas in Indonesia, India,
Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Thailand and Australia. This re ﬂects
the wealth of ecosystem services provided by mangroves in these
countries and the large areas occupied by mangroves (Supple-
mentary Figs. 4b –e and 6).
Considering priority areas identi ﬁed for conservation of biodi-
versity and ecosystem services, only 4.9% of the high priority and 12.1%
of the mid priority are within the current protected area system. Thus,
the existing protected area system has poor coverage of priority areas
(i.e., both <13.5%). More concerning is that the current protection only
reaches 6.8% (64 out of 944) of the conservation targets set for indi-
vidual mangrove species across biophysical typologies and biogeo-
graphic provinces (Fig. 3c). None of the species reaches all these
individual conservation targets. Therefore, the current system of
strictly protected areas neither meets reasonable conservation targets
for biodiversity nor efﬁciently conserves ecosystem services.
There was also extensive variability at the continental and country
scale in the ef ﬁciency of current protection of priority areas. In the
Americas, 30.4% of the high-priority areas are currently strictly pro-
tected, in Oceania 8.8%, while in Asia and Africa <2%. A total of 14
countries currently strictly protect >30% of their high-priority areas
but 63 countries do not protect any of them. Among the countries that
have the largest percentages of high-priority areas, only Taiwan
(83.0%) and Australia (21.1%) are strictly protecting >5% of those areas,
while India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, Papua New Guinea, Thai-
land and Vietnam strictly protect <5%.
Expanding protection by adding to the current protected area
system
As it is unlikely that current strictly protected areas will be moved, we
also analysed their expansion to protect 30% of the global mangrove
area
45,a sp r o p o s e db yt h e“30 by 30 ” target4. We used the same
approach as in the initial prioritisation: simultaneously maximising the
protection of biodiversity and preservation of ecosystem services
(Supplementary Fig. 7). We found that almost all priority areas to
expand the system to 30% are in Asia (63.6%) and Oceania (17.0%),
highlighting their high conservation value (Fig. 1a). At the country
level, the greatest protected area expansion was needed in Indonesia
(30.1%), Papua New Guinea (10.5%), India (9.5%), Panama (5.3%) and
Thailand (5.0%; Fig. 1a). Similarly, we analysed the expansion of the
current system of protected areas (including those that are not strictly
protected) to protect 50% of the global mangrove area (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 8). Results are similar, with most priority areas for the
expansion in Asia (74.5%) and Oceania (19.5%; Supplementary Fig. 3).
Ecosystem services provided by the proposed expansion to 30%
o ft h eg l o b a lm a n g r o v ea r e ah a st h ep o t e n t i a lt os a f e g u a r da n ds u s t a i n
an additional: 16.3 billion USD of coastal property value (33.7% of the
total amount represented by mangroves globally), 6.1 million people
(64.8%), 1173.1 Tg C (17.4%) and 50.7 million ﬁsher days year
−1 (28.6%;
Figs. 1b–e, 3d). Countries that provide most of these additional eco-
system services are India (6.1 billion USD, 2.1 million people, 14.3 mil-
lion ﬁsher days year −1), China (3.7 billion USD), Vietnam (2.9 million
people), Indonesia (460.0 Tg C), Papua New Guinea (156.0 Tg C) and
Bangladesh (7.0 millionﬁsher days year
−1; Fig. 1b–e).
The efﬁciency of including ecosystem services
The solution of the conservation plan that optimise selection for bio-
diversity and the one that optimise selection for both biodiversity and
ecosystem services were partially overlapping (Cohen’s Kappa index of
0.7, Supplementary Fig. 9). Remarkably, the ef ﬁciency of solutions
meeting conservation targets when optimising for both biodiversity
and ecosystem services was very similar to the efﬁciency of solutions
when optimising for biodiversity alone (Fig. 3a, c, e). For example, a
similar percentage of targets was reached by the expansion to 30% for
the protection of only biodiversity (81.0% of the target) and for bio-
diversity and ecosystem services (80.0%). Similar results were
observed across all area budgets. This seems to be related to higher
ecosystem services provisioning in areas of higher biodiversity (here
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 3
0
3
6
9
12 CameroonEritreaGambiaGNQGuinea-BissauMadagascarMozambique
Senegal
South Africa
Tanzania
Brazil
Colombia
Cuba
Honduras
Mexico
Nicaragua
PanamaSurinameUSAVenezuela
Bangladesh
Cambodia
China
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Myanmar
Philippines
Thailand
Vietnam
Australia
Fiji
Micronesia
New Caledonia
New ZealandPalau
PNG
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Vanuatu
Africa
Americas
Asia
Oceania
a) Mangrove area (thousands km )
2
0
2
4
6
8 BeninCôte d’IvoireGambiaGuineaMadagascarMozambique
Nigeria
Senegal
Sudan
Tanzania
Belize
Brazil
Cuba
Dom
inican RepublicGuadeloupe
GuyanaMexicoNicaraguaPanamaUSA
Bangladesh
ChinaIndia
Indonesia
PakistanPhilippinesSaudi Arabia
Taiwan
UEAVietnam
Australia
Fiji
Micronesia
New Caledonia
New ZealandPalau
PNG
Sa
moa
Solomon Islands
Vanuatu
Africa
Americas
Asia
Oceania
b) Properties (billions USD)
0
0.8
1.6
2.4
3.2 BeninCôte d’IvoireGambiaGui
nea
MadagascarMozambi
que
Nigeria
Senegal
Sudan
Tanzania
Brazil
Colombia
Cuba
Guyana
HondurasMexicoNicaraguaPanam
a
USAVenez
uela
Banglade
sh
ChinaIndia
Indonesia
Myanm
ar
Pakis
tan
PhilippinesSau
di Arab
iaTaiwanVietnam
Australia
Fiji
Micronesia
New Caledonia
New ZealandPalau
PNG
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Vanuatu
Africa
Americas
Asia
Oceania
c) Population (million people)
0
200
400
600
800 CameroonEritreaGambiaGNQGuinea-BissauMadagascar
Mozambique
Senegal
South Africa
Tanzania
Brazil
ColombiaCuba
HondurasMexicoNicar
aguaPanamaSurinameUSAVenezuela
Bangladesh
Cambodia
India
Indonesia
MalaysiaMyanm
ar
Philippines
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Vietnam
Australia
Fiji
Micronesia
New Caledonia
New 
Zealand
Palau
PNG
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Vanuatu
Africa
Americas
Asia
Oceania
d) Carbon (Tg)
0
3.75
7.5
11.25
15 Ango
la
BeninCameroonGambiaGNQMad
agasc
ar
Mozambique
Senegal
South A
frica
Tanzani
a
Brazil
Colombia
Costa Rica
Guat
emalaHond
urasMexicoNicaraguaPana
ma
USAVenezuela
Banglad
esh
Cambodia
China
India
Indone
sia
Mala
ysia
Myanmar
Sri Lanka
Thaila
ndVietnam
Australia
Fiji
Micronesia
New Caledonia
New Zea
land
Palau
PNG
Samoa
Solom
on IslandsVanuatu
Africa
Americas
Asia
Oceania
e) Fishing intensity (million fisher days yr−1)
Already protected areas
Expansion to 30%
GNQ = Republic of Equatorial Guinea
PNG = Papua New Guinea
UAE = United Arab Emirates
USA = United States of America
Fig. 1 | Cumulative mangrove area and cumulative ecosystem services, by
continent and country, for current strictly protected areas and for priority
areas added to the current system. aMangrove area and (b–e) ecosystem services
provided by current strictly protected areas (dark shade) and priority areas to
expand the current system to 30% coverage (light shade) resulting from a prior-
itisation that maximises protection of biodiversity and ecosystem services. Only the
top-10 countries per continent are shown: (a)b ym a n g r o v ea r e aa n d(b–e)b y
amount of ecosystem services provided.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 4
estimated by species richness) that drive the selection of mangrove
areas that provide more ecosystem services. This could be explained
by higher functional diversity in areas of higher species richness, which
can guarantee the provisioning of multiple services.
Nonetheless, in the prioritisation that weighed (i.e., increase the
probability of selection of a certain feature) the ecosystem services
more than biodiversity, we observed an even steeper rise in the ser-
vices selected at the beginning of the prioritisation (Supplementary
15°S
10°S
 5°S
 0°
140°E1 4 5 °E1 5 0 °E1 5 5 °E
15°N
20°N
25°N
35°E4 0 °E
12°N
14°N
16°N
18°N
20°N
22°N
24°N
 90°W 8 5 °W 8 0 °W 7 5 °W
10°S
 8°S
 6°S
 4°S
 2°S
110°E 115 °E 120 °E 125 °E
 5°N
10°N
15°N
20°N
 95°E1 0 0 °E1 0 5 °E
1
25
50
75
100
PropertiesCarbon
Rank
d)c)b)
e) f)
f
e d
c
b
Fishing
PeopleBiodiversity
a)
0%
50%
100%
Fig. 2 | Global mangrove priority areas for protection. a Priority map, with
hexagonal bins aggregated at a resolution of 200-km alongshore for visualisation,
shows the median value of the rank of the planning units in the selection (the lower
the rank, the more important the planning unit is for protecting biodiversity and
delivering ecosystem services). The radar plot shows the percentage of ecosystem
services protected and the percentage of conservation targets reached in the top-
ranked 10% and 30% priority areas (same colour scale as the map). Inset maps
(planning units at the analysis resolution of 20-km alongshore) show results for: (b)
Southeast Asia; (c)T h eR e dS e a ;(d) West Papua, Papua New Guinea, Northern
Australia; (e) Indonesia and (f) Mesoamerica and Cuba.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 5
0
25
50
75
100
02 5 5 0 7 5 1 0 0
Mangroves selected in priority areas (%)
Biodiversity targets reached (%)
a)
0
25
50
75
100
02 5 5 0 7 5 1 0 0
Mangroves selected in priority areas (%)
Service protected (%)
b)
Selection of priority areas considering all mangrove areas
0
25
50
75
100
02 5 5 0 7 5 1 0 0
Mangroves selected in priority areas (%)
Biodiversity targets reached (%)
c)
0
25
50
75
100
02 5 5 0 7 5 1 0 0
Mangroves selected in priority areas (%)
Service protected (%)
d)
Selection of priority areas adding to current strictly protected areas
0
25
50
75
100
02 5 5 0 7 5 1 0 0
Mangroves selected in priority areas (%)
Biodiversity targets reached (%)
e)
0
25
50
75
100
02 5 5 0 7 5 1 0 0
Mangroves selected in priority areas (%)
Service protected (%)
f)
Selection of priority areas adding to all current protected areas
Fishing People Properties CarbonBiodiversity Biodiversity & ecosystem services
Fig. 3 | Conservation targets reached and ecosystem services conserved, in a
series of prioritisations based on incremental area budgets.For incremental
area budgets (i.e., increasing the area of mangroves protected): (a, c) Conservation
targets reached (%) in a spatial prioritisation optimised for biodiversity alone or for
both biodiversity and ecosystem services; and (b, d) the percentage of the total of
each ecosystem service protected. Prioritisations (a, b) optimise the selection
considering all mangrove areas; (c, d) add the selection to the current system of
strictly protected areas (13.5% of mangrove area, indicated by a dashed vertical line)
and (e, f) add the selection to the current system of all protected areas (43% of
mangrove areas, indicated by a dashed vertical line).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 6
Fig. 10). This could also explain why the prioritisation that targets
biodiversity only and the one that targets both biodiversity and eco-
system services track each other. For larger weights, the efﬁciency in
the selection of areas of high ecosystem services provisioning increa-
ses, but at the expense of the ef ﬁciency in protecting mangrove bio-
diversity (Supplementary Fig. 10). This means that by protecting a
similar extent of mangroves, it is possible to reach the same con-
servation goals, whilst harnessing more ecosystem services. However,
we observed variability in the percentage of conservation targets
reached when comparing the ef ﬁciency of protecting mangrove bio-
diversity and ecosystem services adding to the current system of
strictly protected areas. A much larger percentage of targets (44.9%)
are reached when we protect the top-ranked 13% (i.e., equivalent to the
current area of the protected area system) of mangrove areas ignoring
the current strictly protected areas, compared to the much-smaller
percentage of targets reached by the current strictly protected area
system (6.8%, Fig.3a, c). For larger area budgets, the number of targets
reached becomes more similar. In fact, when currently strictly pro-
tected areas were ignored, 99.5% of the conservation targets (939 out
of 944) were reached when 50% of the global mangrove area was
selected (Fig. 3a). Similarly, when we started with the current
strictly protected areas, 99.0% of the targets were reached when 50%
of the mangrove area was selected (Fig. 3c). When protected areas
were included in the analysis a larger mangrove area required pro-
tection to reach all the conservation targets (Fig. 3e).
Regardless of whether we started with existing strictly protected
areas or not, ecosystem services considered were ef ﬁciently max-
imised in the prioritisation (Fig.3b, d, f). Planning units selected earlier
in the prioritisation provided rapid gains in the amount of ecosystem
services protected (Fig.3b, d, f). Diminishing returns were provided by
areas selected later, as fewer areas with high values of ecosystem
services were available for selection. This is evident for people and
properties safeguarded from ﬂooding. The frequency distribution of
those services shows that they vary by many orders of magnitude, with
a few areas providing substantial services that could be preferentially
chosen early in the prioritisation, but the majority of areas providing
low service values (Supplementary Fig. 11a, b). By contrast, the fre-
quency distribution of carbon sequestration shows that it varies by
much less than an order of magnitude, with most values in a tight range
(Supplementary Fig. 11c), resulting in a near-linear increase in the
amount of stored carbon conserved as the protected area system is
expanded (Fig.3b, d, f). Further, after an initial large gain in ecosystem
services, some areas are selected that provide few additional ecosys-
tem services because they are important for mangrove species con-
servation (Fig. 3a, c, e).
We found that mangroves in the current protected areas system
provide substantial carbon sequestration and coastal risk reduction
for properties, but low amounts of ﬁshing and coastal risk reduction
for people (Fig. 4). The mean value of coastal risk reduction for
properties, and the mean carbon stored, is similar in planning units
currently protected and in those selected by the prioritisation that
optimised protection for biodiversity and ecosystem services
(Fig. 4a, c). Lower values have been observed when comparing
mangroves targeted by less strictly protected areas compared to
those selected by the prioritisation. On the other hand, we found
much higher mean values of people safeguarded from ﬂooding and
ﬁshing intensity in planning units selected by the prioritisation
relative to those currently protected (Fig. 4b, d). This is probably
because protected areas have been preferentially placed in areas
with lower con ﬂicts with ﬁsheries and people, but could also be
related to the capability of protected areas to reduceﬁshing pressure
and prevent the presence of people (Fig. 4b, d). The weak correlation
between the value of properties and the number of people safe-
guarded from ﬂooding by mangroves (Fig. 4a, b) is likely to be a
consequence of the difference in the value of properties between
rich and poor countries. We also found that the prioritisation that
optimised protection for both biodiversity and ecosystems yielded
higher ecosystem service values than the prioritisation that
0 × 10+0
2×1 0 +5
4 × 10+5
6×1 0 +5
Mean properties protected ($k m
−2)
a)
0
100
200
300
Mean population protected (people km
−2)
b)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
Mean carbon stored (Tg km
−2)
c)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Mean fishing Intensity (fisher days km
−2 year
−1)
d)
Existing protected areas (IUCN I-IV) Other existing protected areas Biodiversity Biodiversity and ecosystem services
Fig. 4 | Mean ecosystem services provided by mangroves in different protected
areas. Existing IUCN I-IV protected areas system (blue), other existing protected
areas (red), and proposed expansion to 30% for protection for biodiversity alone
(orange) and for biodiversity and ecosystem services (yellow). Ecosystem services
were: (a) properties and (b) population safeguarded from ﬂooding, (c)c a r b o n
stored and (d) ﬁshing intensity supported by mangroves.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 7
optimised protection solely for biodiversity, except for carbon sto-
rage (Fig. 4). The difference in mean carbon stored between the
prioritisations and the currently protected areas is small compared
to the large increase in bene ﬁts provided by other services because
of the near-linear increase in bene ﬁts compared with other ecosys-
tem services (Figs. 3b, d, f and 4c and Supplementary Fig. 10).
Discussion
Given the economic and social costs of conserving biodiversity, areas
for protection need to be prioritised. We identi ﬁed priority areas for
protection of mangrove biodiversity and their valuable ecosystem
services in all continents, but Asia stands out as the most important. It
has large biodiverse mangrove areas that support high levels ofﬁshing
and protect many coastal communities
21,31,40. The current strictly pro-
tected area system conserves 13.5% of mangroves globally, but is not
representative of all mangrove species, and does relatively poorly in
protecting high priority conservation areas in our analysis. For exam-
ple, the current system protects only 4.5% of the high-priority areas for
ecosystem services, and thus performs worse than if areas for pro-
tection were selected randomly. This highlights that there is con-
siderable opportunity to optimise future protection. Indeed, most
high-priority areas are not currently protected. Some countries, such
as Indonesia, India, Vietnam and Papua New Guinea have many high-
priority areas, but have low levels of current protection. Considering
that most priority areas identiﬁed are in developing countries and that
some of their ecosystem services provide bene ﬁts both locally and
globally, we need to support efforts within these countries to imple-
ment enhanced management measures to maintain biodiversity and
provisioning of ecosystem services in their mangrove ecosystems
46.
High-income countries, whose consumption levels exacerbate biodi-
versity and carbon storage loss in middle and low-income countries
47,
could helpﬁnance the global protection of mangroves and alternatives
to activities that have a negative impact on biodiversity and their
ecosystem services.
In many countries where mangroves thrive, awareness of the
intrinsic value of mangroves is increasing and with it, their protection
(e.g., increasing mangrove conservation in Brazil
48) and restoration
(e.g., the Indonesian government promising to restore 600,000 ha of
mangroves by 202449). Considering that the restoration of mangroves
is expensive and not always effective 50,51, the protection of natural
mangroves is a more effective conservation solution in areas impor-
tant for biodiversity and ecosystem services. Further, restored man-
groves provide lower ecosystem services than natural and naturally
regenerated
50,51. Multiple countries and regions are currently engaged
in coastal conservation planning to expand their protected areas sys-
tem, and some are trying to include ecosystem services (e.g., the
Caribbean Challenge Initiative
52, The Seychelles Marine Spatial Plan
Initiative53 and Belize Nationally Determined Contribution19). Although
there are multiple examples in the literature of conservation planning
that include ecosystem services at a regional scale 15–17, almost all
initiatives calculate the values of services as co-bene ﬁts and do not
include them in the process for the selection of protected areas. Our
results show that including ecosystem services in the selection of areas
for protection provides beneﬁts and can be considered when imple-
menting new protected areas systems. The patterns we found are
similar to those reported by Arkema et al.
19. Increases in both ﬁsheries
beneﬁts and coastal risk reduction become small for high conservation
targets, while carbon sequestration beneﬁts continue to grow linearly.
This seems to be related to the non-linear relationship between ﬁsh-
eries beneﬁts and coastal risk reduction with mangrove area19.C o u n -
tries in the analysis where large areas were selected as high priorities
for conservation are obvious places for expansion, building on the
encouraging results that have been observed in multiple countries
where protection is increasing
54.T h ei d e n t iﬁcation and protection of
the areas providing greater ecosystem services can also be used to
incentivise the enforcement of protected areas, highlighting the ben-
eﬁts to people. For example, our results could inform an expansion of
protected areas in high-priority areas in Asian countries such as
Myanmar, Malaysia and Vietnam, where we found few protected areas
and where mangroves are threatened by deforestation for aquaculture
and agriculture
55.
We also found that many priority areas are close to urban centres
where there are higher ecosystem services provided by mangroves. In
these areas, mangroves are most at risk from clearing, fragmentation,
coastal squeeze and changes in water quality and sedimentation
56.
Although the need for conservation is evident, implementation is not
always straightforward. Future research could also include spatial
patterns of loss to highlight areas at higher risk and therefore require
swift protection. Enforcing protected areas can cause con ﬂicts with
local communities and industries
57. To minimise these con ﬂicts, con-
servation planning generally avoids areas of intense human activity,
minimising the opportunity cost 5. Thus, protected areas are often
established in places that avoid high human populations, valuable
industries, rich agricultural land and productiveﬁshing grounds
8,9.I n
selecting areas for protection by minimising the opportunity cost,
these planning processes can miss the most valuable biodiversity
hotspots and are blind to the ecosystem services provided by
these areas.
By contrast, we identi ﬁed areas for the implementation of con-
servation measures that maximise the protection of ecosystem ser-
vices provided by mangroves and thus have large human beneﬁts. We
identiﬁed areas that provide extensive ecosystem services but also
meet conservation targets for the protection of species and provide
direct services to local people. This approach complements those that
focus on the economic beneﬁts of biodiversity protection rather than
producing a spatial plan (e.g., Costanza et al.
6) and those that identify
ecosystem services co-beneﬁts secured by focusing on biodiversity
protection (e.g., Sievers et al. 13). Although our approach will help
ensure the sustainable delivery of those bene ﬁts into the future, it
might pose challenges because some of the proposed protection,
close to urban areas, could be dif ﬁcult to manage due to human
pressures
58,59. Currently, >50% of protected mangrove ecosystems
suffer high human pressure and are threatened by conversion, frag-
mentation and degradation59. Further, anthropogenic activities are the
main cause of ineffective protected area management60. However, this
should not eliminate the need to protect these areas, which could be
habitats for important species
58 and provide greater ecosystem ser-
vices exactly because of the anthropogenic activities they support or
protect.
A shift might be needed in how many spatial prioritisation pro-
blems are approached. Including ecosystem services in spatial prior-
itisation could be considered for systems where the link between
services and biodiversity is clear. For example, there is strong evidence
that the protection of biodiversity enhances ecosystem services such
as coastal protection, carbon sequestration and enrichment of ﬁsh-
eries in many coastal ecosystems such as coral reefs, salt marshes and
seagrasses
23,61–63. In these cases, the enhanced management of these
systems (including through implementation of protected areas) can be
mitigated by the bene ﬁts provided by the safeguarded ecosystem
services. In other systems, including many offshore marine habitats,
the link between biodiversity and ecosystem services might be less
direct, and minimising conﬂict with industry such as ﬁshing might be
appropriate.
Our global analysis has several caveats that should be considered.
First, we focused on beneﬁts provided by ecosystem services, but we
did not quantify the cost of protecting selected mangrove areas.
Future analyses could measure the trade-off between costs and ben-
eﬁts of protection. Second, although data used on ecosystem services
and species distributions are the best available, they are relatively
coarse. Considering that global prioritisation can hardly adequately
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 8
represent ﬁne-scale variation in the data or local actions64,t h ed e v e l -
opment of systematic conservation plans at local scales are necessary
for the effective implementation and management of protected areas
5.
Third, as boundaries of protected areas do not always line up with the
boundaries of our planning units, we assigned a threshold of 50% of
the area of mangroves in a planning unit to consider it protected, as
has been adopted elsewhere (e.g., Runge et al.
65). However, for studies
focused on management, it could be deﬁned based on the goal of the
prioritisation. Therefore, our results should be interpreted as high-
lighting areas that could be considered for future analysis. Fourth, in
our study, including the coastal risk reduction and ﬁsheries beneﬁts
provided by mangroves has favoured the selection of mangroves close
to urban areas. However, larger bene ﬁts for biodiversity could be
provided by protected areas distant from urban areas, considering the
multiple pressures for biodiversity related to human activities and
infrastructure
66,67. We used data from the best available dataset on
ﬁshing intensity in mangroves 31, but we recognise that the results
could differ using catch or another metric that combines both supply
and demand. In future studies, other metrics of ﬁsheries productivity
could be included to evaluate if theﬁshing intensity and catch overlap.
Fifth, all ecosystem services datasets (i.e., Sanderman et al.
29;S i m a r d
et al.30; Menéndez et al. 21; Zu Ermgassen et al. 31) do not consider that
different mangrove species and assemblages provide different
beneﬁts
68 and that cryptic ecological degradation could result in the
loss of ecosystem services provisioning68,69. Sixth, data from Zu Erm-
gassen et al. 31 did not consider protection status when estimating
ﬁshing intensity in mangrove areas. This could have potentially over-
estimated the bene ﬁts for ﬁshing in areas that are no-take marine
protected areas. Last, we only considered protected areas, but alter-
native approaches such as other effective area-based conservation
measures, indigenous protected and conserved areas, community-
based conservation and payment for ecosystem services could also
ensure positive biodiversity outcomes that are equally valid and help
meet societal goals
70–73.
Expanding the current protected area system for mangroves by
optimising protection for both biodiversity and ecosystem services
could have large bene ﬁts, particularly in terms of coastal protection
for infrastructure and people, and supportingﬁsheries. We found that
biodiversity objectives could be met whilst simultaneously maximising
ecosystem bene ﬁts, with little or no increase in protected area
required. A protected area system predicated on the idea of max-
imising beneﬁts rather than minimising opportunity costs to people
would not only be valuable for livelihoods of coastal people, but also
help address global threats such as climate change and biodiversity
loss. We hope that this work can inform policymakers and other sta-
keholders working in biodiversity conservation about the importance
of explicitly considering ecosystem services in conservation decision
making.
Methods
Study area
Our study area encompassed the global distribution of mangroves
(137,600 km
2 in size). This spatial extent was identiﬁed using the 2016
version of the Global Mangrove Watch (GMW) dataset45 (https://www.
globalmangrovewatch.org; Supplementary Fig. 12). We subdivided the
study area into 9111 hexagonal planning units with a spatial resolution
of 20 km alongshore. Datasets included in this analysis have spatial
resolution ranging from 25 m (i.e., global mangrove distribution from
Bunting et al.
40) to 20 km (i.e., coastal risk reduction values from
Menéndez et al. 21). Hence, we standardised all datasets to a (20 km
along the coast × 20 km inland to include mangroves that extend
inland ~ 400 km²; Menéndez et al.21). Higher resolution data on man-
grove species and ecosystem services are not available. For example,
Chaplin-Kramer et al.
74 report data on the number of people safe-
guarded from ﬂooding by mangroves (and other habitats) at a much
coarser 1° resolution (~12,300 km2 at the equator). The use of relatively
coarse 20-km alongshore planning units in the analysis also assists in
the protection of mangrove patches that are large enough to ensure
the provision of services
75. Planning units were created under the
Mollweide equal-area coordinate reference system (ESRI:54009), and
all spatial datasets described hereafter were reprojected to this coor-
dinate system prior to analysis. Global coastline data was retrieved
using the rnaturalearth package
76. This data was also used, combined
with Exclusive Economic Zones boundaries77, to aggregate the results
by country and continent. All analyses were performed using the R
statistical computing environment (version 4.2.1)
78.
Mangrove biodiversity
We used a variety of data to describe the spatial distribution of man-
grove biodiversity. First, we obtained geographic range data of the 65
most-common mangrove species from the IUCN Red List of Threa-
tened Species
79. These scale-independent vector data report only the
broad range of distribution of the species. Similar to Brooks et al.80,w e
intersected these ranges with GMW mangrove distribution data to
produce high-resolution species distribution data (25-m resolution).
Second, we obtained mangrove biophysical typology data from Wor-
thington et al.
42. These data classify mangroves according to geo-
morphic features (i.e., deltaic, estuarine, lagoonal and open-coast
mangroves) and sedimentary settings (i.e., carbonate and terrigenous
mangroves). Each mangrove species distribution was divided into
separate features by intersecting it with these typologies. Third, we
obtained marine province data from Spalding et al.
43.T h e s ed a t a
classify the world’s coasts and shelves into 12 realms, 62 provinces, and
232 ecoregions based on the analysis of reviews of publications and
expert advice. Each planning unit was assigned a province that pre-
dominantly spans the area.
Conservation features
Three types of data were included in the analysis to ensures the
greatest beneﬁts for biodiversity representation, namely: (1) mangrove
species distribution; (2) mangrove biophysical typology and (3) and
marine provinces of the world. Data on the distribution range of
mangrove species were included to ensure a minimum area require-
ment for each species in each mangrove biophysical typology and
marine province, for the long-term protection of the species. Follow-
ing Rodrigues et al.
44, the conservation target for each species was
calculated using a log 10-interpolation between a maximum target
(100% of the distribution for species with a range <10,000 km2)a n da
minimum target (10% of the distribution for species with a range
>250,000 km
2). This choice tries to counterbalance the bias towards
the larger representation of more widespread species when using a
constant representation target. In fact, species with a smaller dis-
tribution range require more-demanding conservation targets, con-
sidering they tend to be less abundant and thus more vulnerable to
natural events and anthropogenic activities
44. Although this approach
of setting targets is somewhat arbitrary, it is common in multiple
studies (e.g., Runge et al.
65, Hanson et al.81) and is used by international
organisations (e.g., Claes et al.82). In local studies, other methods to set
the targets, such as the use of ﬁx e da r e a - b a s e dp o l i c yt a r g e t s83,m i n i -
mum viable population analysis84 and expert-based thresholds10,c o u l d
be used. Including these features ensures the protection of the het-
erogeneity of mangrove communities across biogeographic habitats
85.
Each data layer was intersected with the mangrove distribution,
resulting in a biodiversity value for each planning unit that represents
the total area of mangroves that intersect that feature in the planning
unit. A full list of all the biodiversity data is in Supplementary Table 1.
Ecosystem services
We included ecosystem services (Supplementary Fig. 6) in the analysis
because it allows the selection of protected areas not only based upon
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 9
meeting biodiversity objectives but also ensuring social and economic
beneﬁts. Mangrove ecosystem services considered were coastal pro-
tection of both people and properties, carbon sequestration, and
beneﬁts for ﬁsheries. Coastal protection and beneﬁts for ﬁsheries were
included in the analysis because they are important in supporting
livelihoods of coastal people
20,31. In fact, mangroves coastal risk
reduction has a direct impact on the lives of coastal communities 20,
whilst protecting areas to increase bene ﬁts for ﬁsheries can ensure
food security for coastal populations 86. Carbon sequestration was
included because it considers the bene ﬁts provided by helping to
stabilise greenhouse gas levels and limiting effects of climate change87.
Since some of these datasets were based on different underlying
mangrove datasets, we interpolated values from each of the datasets
to our planning units using the nearest neighbourhood method. Spe-
ciﬁcally, after intersecting the datasets with the planning units, those
with missing values were assigned the value of the nearest planning
unit with data. Other methods are available (e.g., bilinear interpolation
used in Sala et al.
12), although they all have their own assumptions.
When higher-resolution spatial data on biodiversity distribution and
ecosystem services are available, our analyses could be improved. We
only included three of the multiple ecosystem services provided by
mangroves. Future research, that uses the same method we applied
here, could focus on evaluating and including other services, such as
tourism, when data become available. For all ecosystem services
included in the analysis, spatial interconnection between production
and delivery of the services was not considered given the local beneﬁts
that all these services ensure (i.e., local coastal risk reduction, proﬁts
from the sale of seafood and carbon credits).
Coastal protection. The number of people and the value of the
properties (USD) safeguarded fromﬂooding by mangroves per 20 km
of coastline were obtained from Menéndez et al.
21.T h e s ed a t aw e r e
calculated by comparing ﬂood impact scenarios with and without
mangroves, combined with the global distribution of people and
properties and a corresponding damage function, using the Phi-
lippines as a pilot case. Offshore and nearshore dynamics generated by
tropical cyclones were simulated in the Philippines and then validated
using real data. The results were then used to create a predictive model
that used oceanographic variables to predict cyclone parameters.
Another model was produced to analyse the role of mangroves in
nearshore dynamics. First, offshore hydrodynamic conditions were
resolved under both regular climate and tropical cyclones conditions.
Then, nearshore dynamics were obtained by propagating regular cli-
mate using hybrid downscaling. For tropical cyclones, nearshore
dynamics were produced through the regression model derived from
the Philippines results. The role of mangroves in attenuating ﬂoods
was included to obtain the results for scenarios with and without
mangroves. Finally,ﬂood maps and an assessment of the consequence
of the ﬂooding on people and industrial and residential stock were
produced. The caveats listed in Menéndez et al.
21 are related to the
limitations of bathymetry, topography and mangroves data, and of the
models of the two-dimensional propagations of nearshore waves and
storm surges. Further, some countries with <100 ha of mangroves or
where beneﬁts were too high (>USD 50,000) were removed from the
analysis. In our study, we ran the analysis for mangroves in those
countries, but the quantitative results on the amount of coastal pro-
tection provided should not be considered. The value for each plan-
ning unit was assigned using the nearest neighbour method. Values
were then transformed to risk reduction per km
2 of mangroves by
dividing the number of people and the values of property safeguarded
from ﬂooding by mangroves, as reported by Menéndez et al.21,b yt h e
total mangrove area. This area was de ﬁned as the total area of man-
groves in all planning units that shared the same value of coastal risk
reduction after applying the nearest neighbour method (i.e., one
planning unit that intersected the data point from Menéndez et al.
21
plus the closer planning units that were missing a value before
applying the nearest neighbour method). For each planning unit, the
total number of people and properties safeguarded fromﬂooding was
then calculated by multiplying the value per km
2 of mangroves by the
area of mangroves in that planning unit.
Carbon storage. For each planning unit, the total carbon stock was
calculated as the sum of mean aboveground carbon and soil carbon in
Tg km
−2 (millions of tonnes of C). We used the estimated aboveground
biomass of mangroves from Simard et al.30. They calculated the global
distribution of aboveground mangrove biomass, linking Light Detec-
tion and Ranging (Lidar) heights from the ICESat/GLAS Spaceborne
Lidar mission with the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM)
30-m resolution global Digital Elevation Model (DEM) of mangrove
basal area weighted height. Field data of basal area weighted height
were interpolated with the height data provided by SRTM DEM. The
results were then used to produce a global basal area weighted canopy
height dataset. These data wereﬁnally transformed into aboveground
biomass measurements using an allometric equation derived from the
ﬁeld data. Soil carbon data were obtained from a machine learning-
based model of organic carbon density by Sanderman et al.
29.T h e yﬁrst
compiled a mangrove soil carbon database from peer-reviewed lit-
erature, grey literature and unpublished data. Then, soil carbon was
estimated as a function of depth, an initial estimate of the 0 –200 cm
organic carbon stock from the global SoilGrids 250-m model down-
sampled to 30 m resolution
88, and a suite of spatially-explicit covariate
layers (i.e., vegetation characteristics, digital elevation data, long-term
mean monthly sea surface temperature, tidal elevation amplitude,
mean monthly total suspended matter and mangrove typology). The
organic carbon density at different depths was then cumulatively
summed to calculate organic carbon stock in each pixel where man-
groves were identiﬁed. Both studies outlined their limitations. Simard
et al.
30 indicated the possible effect of using different mangrove extent
maps on their ﬁndings, while Sanderman et al. 29 indicated the possi-
bility of errors and inaccuracy in the database used and the limited
information reported about plot locations. The mean value of above-
ground biomass and soil carbon for each planning unit was calculated
as the mean of all the values of aboveground biomass and soil carbon
overlapped by the planning unit.
Fisheries beneﬁts.M e a nﬁshing intensity was used as a proxy for the
beneﬁts of mangroves toﬁsheries. Fishing intensity from zu Ermgassen
et al.
31 was calculated as the mean number ofﬁsher days km−2 year−1 for
each planning unit. zu Ermgassen et al. 31 developed a conceptual
model that calculated mangrove ﬁshing intensity using data on the
number of mangrove ﬁshers (commercial and non-commercial small-
scale inshore ﬁsheries), local non-urban population, accessibility to
markets, and catchability as a result of the weather. These variables
were identiﬁed following an expert-based, anonymous, three-round
Delphi method. This method was used to identify the variables gath-
ering consensus across multiple experts that were required to score
the importance of each factor in determining mangrove ﬁshing
intensity and the certainty in their assessment. The ﬁrst round was
based on an open-ended survey where experts were asked to rank the
twenty most important factors determining the volume of ﬁsh and
invertebrate catch. In the second and third rounds, the same experts
were asked to score the importance of the factors (1 = not important to
5 = extremely important) about the ﬁshery type they were most
familiar with. Factors that had scores of 1 or 2 by >70% of the experts
were removed. A total of 16 factors were selected, but only four had
suitable data for the development of the map: number of mangrove
ﬁshers, local non-urban population, accessibility to markets and
catchability as a result of the weather. The number of small-scale
ﬁshers, assumed to be proportional to the local non-urban population,
was obtained, on a country level, from a literature review. A “market
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 10
effect” was included by doubling the number of ﬁshermen per capita
for all the areas within 3 h from cities with >50,000 people. Then, the
resulting ﬁshermen were assigned to areas of shallow shelf, coral
reefs and mangroves based on distance and the ratio 10:10:1. To
calculate the number of ﬁsh days, zu Ermgassen et al.
31 assumed that
ﬁshermen are out at sea 60% of the days. A storm index was calcu-
lated to correct the results, considering a 0.75 loss per storm day.
This study reported some caveats related to the limited subset of the
identiﬁed factors that were mappable, the lack of experts with
experience in West or Central Africa, the inability to include other
structured habitats other than the shallow shelf and coral reefs
habitats, the application of global datasets for accounting the
impact of storms, and the exclusive focus on near-shore ﬁsheries.
Further, using ﬁshing intensity could be misleading because it does
not consider the supply of the service considering that the amount
of catch could differ among different areas for the same number of
days the ﬁshermen are at sea. However, we decided to use these data
because, to our knowledge, these are the best available quantitative
data on ﬁsheries in mangroves. The study could be improved with
ﬁner-scale data when they are available.
Existing protected areas
Protected area data were obtained from the World Database on pro-
tected areas (WDPA)89. Data were then cleaned and prepared for ana-
lysis following best practices90,91. Planning units with at≥50% coverage
were subsequently treated as protected. In most analyses, we con-
centrated on categories I-IV because there is uncertainty in the effec-
tiveness of protected areas having lower IUCN categories because they
might be “paper parks” with no effective governance
92.T h i si su n r e -
lated to the involvement of indigenous people in conservation that has
been proven to be valuable
70–72. This is also proven by the current
conversation in the development of new categories to deﬁne different
types of protected areas93.
Spatial prioritisation
Priority areas for mangrove protection were identi ﬁed using spatial
prioritisation5. To avoid numerical issues, all ecosystem services
values were rescaled to 0 –1000 before prioritisation. A ﬁrst prior-
itisation based on currently protected areas was generated without
locking in planning units where mangroves were protected. In a
second prioritisation that accounted for existing protected areas,
planning units that contained mangroves predominantly covered
by existing protected areas ( ≥50%) were locked in. The cost of
including a planning unit in the resulting system was de ﬁned as the
mangrove extent in the planning unit. Following Jung et al.
14,
prioritisations were generated using a series of incremental budgets
from 1% to 100% (or 14% to 100% when expanding the current sys-
tem of strictly protected areas and 44% to 100% when expanding
considering all protected areas) of the current total extent of
mangroves to identify a nested set of priority areas. For a given area
budget, the prioritisation process selected areas that minimise the
overall shortfall for the conservation targets described earlier whilst
minimising the cost (i.e., area). To maximise ecosystem services
provided, we also included each as a feature with a conservation
target of 100%
10. To compare how much more expensive in terms of
extra area needed our prioritisation based on protecting biodi-
versity and ecosystem services would be than a more standard
prioritisation approach of conserving biodiversity alone, a prior-
itisation was also generated without ecosystem services. The degree
of agreement between the results was calculated using the Cohen ’s
Kappa Coef ﬁcient. To explore uncertainty in our analyses, prior-
itisations were also run for incremental ecosystem services weights
(i.e., 10, 100, 1000) to favour the selection of planning units that
provide bene ﬁts for the protection of ecosystem services over
planning units that provide bene ﬁts for biodiversity representation.
Higher weights favour the representation of areas that provide
more ecosystem services over areas that are important for biodi-
versity. Weights used here are indicative and arbitrary, and further
research in the effects of weighting ecosystem services could be
carried out for analysis at the management level to make the best
conservation decisions. All prioritisations were completed using the
prioritizr R package
38 and Gurobi 94, using an optimality gap (the
acceptable deviance from the optimal objective) of 0.01%.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
Datasets generated analysed during the current study are available
online. The global map of mangroves is available for download from
the Global Mangrove Watch 40 website ( https://www.
globalmangrovewatch.org/). IUCN distribution of mangrove
species41 is available at: https://www.iucnredlist.org/resources/
spatial-data-download. The global biophysical mangrove typology 42
and the marine provinces of the world 43 are available for download
from the Ocean Data Viewer ( https://data.unep-wcmc.org/). The
ecosystem services layers can be downloaded for aboveground
carbon
30 (https://daac.ornl.gov/cgi-bin/dsviewer.pl?ds_id=1665), soil
carbon29,95 (https://zenodo.org/record/1469348#.Yv9HDcJBy3A), and
coastal protection21 (https://osf.io/ecs4p/). For ﬁshing intensity data31,
please contact the authors of the original article ( https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ecss.2020.106975). Data on protected areas can be down-
loaded from the WDPA database39 (https://www.protectedplanet.net/
). Global coastline data can be downloaded using the rnaturalearth
package
76. Exclusive Economic Zones boundaries 77 are available at:
https://www.marineregions.org/sources.php#marbound.S o u r c e
data are provided with this paper. Datasets generated during the
current study are currently available at
96: https://doi.org/10.5281/
ZENODO.8272951. Source data are provided with this paper.
Code availability
Code to run the analysis in this study is currently available at: https://
github.com/AlviDab/SpatialPrioritisation_MangrovesEcosystemBeneﬁts.
T h ec o d ei sa r c h i v e di naZ e n o d od i g i t a lr e p o s i t o r y96: https://doi.org/10.
5281/ZENODO.8272951.
References
1. Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. Ecosystems And Human Well-
being: Synthesis.( I s l a n dP r e s s ,2 0 0 5 ) .
2. Cardinale, B. J. et al. Biodiversity loss and its impact on humanity.
Nature 486,5 9–67 (2012).
3. CBD. Decision adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention on Biological Diversity at its tenth meeting.The Stra-
tegic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and the Aichi Biodiversity Tar-
gets. https://www.cbd.int/doc/decisions/cop-10/cop-10-dec-02-
en.pdf (2011).
4. CBD. First Draft Of The Post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework.1 2
https://www.cbd.int/doc/c/abb5/591f/2e46096d3f0330b08ce87
a45/wg2020-03-03-en.pdf(2021).
5 . M c I n t o s h ,E .J . ,P r e s s e y ,R .L . ,L l o y d ,S . ,S m i t h ,R .J .&G r e n y e r ,R .T h e
impact of systematic conservation planning.Annu. Rev. Environ.
Resour. 42,6 7 7–697 (2017).
6. Costanza, R. et al. Changes in the global value of ecosystem ser-
vices. Glob. Environ. Change26,1 5 2–158 (2014).
7. Costanza, R. et al. The global value of coastal wetlands for storm
protection.Glob. Environ. Change70, 102328 (2021).
8 . F a l e i r o ,F .V . ,M a c h a d o ,R .B .&L o y o l a ,R .D .D eﬁning spatial con-
servation priorities in the face of land-use and climate change.Biol.
Conserv. 158,2 4 8–257 (2013).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 11
9. Brito-Morales, I. et al. Towards climate-smart, three-dimensional
protected areas for biodiversity conservation in the high seas.Nat.
Clim. Change 12,4 0 2–407 (2022).
10. Jung, M. et al. Areas of global importance for conserving terrestrial
biodiversity, carbon and water.Nat. Ecol. Evol. 5, 1499–1509
(2021).
11. Marcos, C. et al. Reviewing the ecosystem services, societal goods,
and beneﬁts of marine protected areas. Front. Mar. Sci. 8,
613819 (2021).
12. Sala, E. et al. Protecting the global ocean for biodiversity, food and
climate. Nature 592,3 9 7–402 (2021).
13. Sievers, M. et al. Co-occurrenc e of biodiversity, carbon storage,
coastal protection, andﬁsh and invertebrate production to inform
global mangrove conservation planning.Sci. Total Environ. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.166357(2023).
1 4 . H i l b o r n ,R .&K a i s e r ,M .J .Ap a t hf o r w a r df o ra n a l y s i n gt h ei m p a c t so f
marine protected areas.Nature 607,E 1–E2 (2022).
15. White, C., Halpern, B. S. & Kappel, C. V. Ecosystem service tradeoff
analysis reveals the value of marine spatial planning for multiple
ocean uses. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 4696–4701 (2012).
16. Lester, S. E. et al. Evaluating tradeoffs among ecosystem services to
inform marine spatial planning.Mar. Policy 38,8 0–89 (2013).
17. Arkema, K. K. et al. Embedding ecosystem services in coastal
planning leads to better outcomes for people and nature.Proc. Natl
A c a d .S c i .U S A112,7 3 9 0–7395 (2015).
18. Dahdouh-Guebas, F. et al. Reconc iling nature, people and policy in
the mangrove social-ecological system through the adaptive cycle
heuristic.Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci. 248, 106942 (2021).
19. Arkema, K. K. et al. Evidence-based target setting informs blue
carbon strategies for nationally determined contributions.Nat.
Ecol. Evol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-023-02081-1(2023).
20. Marois, D. E. & Mitsch, W. J. Coastal protection from tsunamis and
cyclones provided by mangrove wetlands– ar e v i e w .Int. J. Bio-
d i v e r s .S c i .E c o s y s t .S e r v .M a n a g .11,7 1–83 (2015).
21. Menéndez, P., Losada, I. J., Torres-Ortega, S., Narayan, S. & Beck, M.
W. The Global Flood Protection Beneﬁts of Mangroves.Sci. Rep.
10,
4404 (2020).
22. Alongi, D. M. Carbon cycling and storage in mangrove forests.
A n n u .R e v .M a r .S c i .6,1 9 5–219 (2014).
23. Hutchison, J., Spalding, M. & zu Ermgassen, P. T h eR o l eO fM a n -
groves In Fisheries Enhancement. Vol. 54, p. 434 (The Nature Con-
servancy and Wetlands International, 2014).
24. Brander, L. M. et al. The global costs and bene ﬁts of expanding
Marine Protected Areas.Mar. Policy 116, 103953 (2020).
25. Böhnke-Henrichs, A., Baulcomb, C., Koss, R., Hussain, S. S. & de
Groot, R. S. Typology and indicators of ecosystem services for
marine spatial planning and management.J. Environ. Manag. 130,
135–145 (2013).
26. Di Lorenzo, M., Guidetti, P., Di Franco, A., Calò, A. & Claudet, J.
Assessing spillover from marine protected areas and its drivers: a
meta‐analytical approach.Fish Fish. 21,9 0 6–915 (2020).
27. López-Angarita, J., Tilley, A., Hawkins, J. P., Pedraza, C. & Roberts, C.
M. Land use patterns and inﬂuences of protected areas on man-
groves of the eastern tropical Paciﬁc. Biol. Conserv. 227,
82–91 (2018).
28. Roberts, C. M. et al. Marine reserves can mitigate and promote
adaptation to climate change.P r o c .N a t lA c a d .S c i .U S A114,
6167–6175 (2017).
29. Sanderman, J. et al. A global map of mangrove forest soil carbon at
30 m spatial resolution. Environ. Res. Lett. 13,0 5 5 0 0 2( 2 0 1 8 ) .
30. Simard, M. et al. Mangrove canopy height globally related to pre-
cipitation, temperature and cyclone frequency.Nat. Geosci. 12,
40–45 (2019).
31. zu Ermgassen, P. S. E. et al. Reprint of: Fishers who rely on man-
groves: Modelling and mapping the global intensity of mangrove-
associatedﬁsheries. Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci. 248, 107159 (2021).
32. Wyborn, C. & Evans, M. C. Conservation needs to break free from
global priority mapping.Nat. Ecol. Evol. 5,1 3 2 2–1324 (2021).
33. Pritchard, R., Sauls, L. A., Oldekop, J. A., Kiwango, W. A. &
Brockington, D. Data justice and biodiversity conservation Justicia
Informativa y Conservación de la Biodiversidad.Conserv. Biol.
https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.13919(2022).
34. Gaymer, C. F. et al. Merging top-down and bottom-up approaches
in marine protected areas planning: experiences from around the
globe. Aquat. Conserv. Mar. Freshw. Ecosyst.24,1 2 8–
144 (2014).
35. Ban, N. C. & Klein, C. J. Spatial socioeconomic data as a cost in
systematic marine conservation planning.Conserv. Lett. 2,
206–215 (2009).
36. Chaplin-Kramer, R. et al. Conservation needs to integrate knowl-
edge across scales. Nat. Ecol. Evol. 6, 118–119 (2022).
37. Dahdouh-Guebas, F. et al. Cross-cutting research themes for future
mangrove forest research.Nat. Plants 8, 1131–1135 (2022).
38. Hanson, J. O. et al. Prioritizr: Systematic Conservation Prioritization in
R (2021).
39. UNEP-WCMC & IUCN. Protected Planet: The World Database on
Protected Areas (WDPA). (UNEP-WCMC and IUCN, 2021).
40. Bunting, P. et al. The Global Mangrove Watch — AN e w2 0 1 0
Global Baseline of Mangrove Extent. Remote Sens. 10,
1669 (2018).
41. IUCN. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2021-3(2021).
42. Worthington, T. A. et al. A global biophysical typology of man-
groves and its relevance for ecosystem structure and deforestation.
Sci. Rep. 10, 14652 (2020).
43. Spalding, M. D. et al. Marine ecoregions of the world: a bior-
egionalization of coastal and shelf areas.BioScience 57,
573–583 (2007).
44. Rodrigues, A. S. L. et al. Global gap analysis: priority regions for
expanding the global protected-area network.BioScience54,
1092 (2004).
4 5 . R o b e r t s ,C .M . ,O’ Leary, B. C. & Hawkins, J. P. Climate change
mitigation and nature conservation both require higher protected
area targets.Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.375, 20190121 (2020).
46. Niesten, E., Zurita, P. & Banks, S. Conservation agreements as a tool
to generate direct incentives for biodiversity conservation.Biodi-
versity 11,5 –8( 2 0 1 0 ) .
47. Marques, A. et al. Increasing impacts of land use on biodiversity and
carbon sequestration driven by population and economic growth.
Nat. Ecol. Evol. 3,6 2 8–637 (2019).
48. Maretti, C. C. et al. Marine and coastal protected and conserved
areas strategy in Brazil: Context, lessons, challenges,ﬁnance, par-
ticipation, new management models, andﬁrst results. Aquat.
Conserv. Mar. Freshw. Ecosyst.29,4 4–70 (2019).
49. Sasmito, S. D. et al. Challenges and opportunities for achieving
Sustainable Development Goals through restoration of Indonesia
’ s
mangroves.Nat. Ecol. Evol. 7,6 2–70 (2023).
50. Schmitt, K. & Duke, N. C. Tropical Forestry Handbook(eds. Köhl, M.
&P a n c e l ,L . )p .1–29 (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2015).
51. Su, J., Friess, D. A. & Gasparatos, A. A meta-analysis of the ecolo-
gical and economic outcomes of mangrove restoration.Nat.
Commun. 12,5 0 5 0( 2 0 2 1 ) .
52. Caribbean Challenge Initiative. https://caribbeanchallengeinitiative.
com (2023).
53. The Nature Conservancy. Evaluation of Ecosystem Goods and Ser-
vices for Seychelles’ Existing and Proposed Protected Area System.
An unpublished report to Government of Seychelles– MACCE and
SWIOFish3 programme. 78 (2022).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 12
54. The State of the World’s Mangroves 2022. https://www.
mangrovealliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/The-State-of-
the-Worlds-Mangroves-Report_2022.pdf(2022).
55. Goldberg, L., Lagomasino, D., Thomas, N. & Fatoyinbo, T. Global
declines in human‐driven mangrove loss.Glob. Change Biol. 26,
5844–5855 (2020).
56. Turschwell, M. P. et al. Multi-scale estimation of the effects of
pressures and drivers on mangrove forest loss globally.Biol. Con-
serv. 247,1 0 8 6 3 7( 2 0 2 0 ) .
57. Venter, O. et al. Bias in protected-area location and its effects on
long-term aspirations of biodiversity conventions.Conserv. Biol.32,
127–134 (2018).
58. Sodhi, N. S. et al. The state and conservation of Southeast Asian
biodiversity.Biodivers. Conserv.19,3 1 7–328 (2010).
59. Jones, K. R. et al. One-third of global protected land is under intense
human pressure. Science 360,7 8 8–791 (2018).
6 0 . d eA l m e i d a ,L .T . ,O l í m p i o ,J .L .S . ,P a n t a l e n a ,A .F . ,d eA l m e i d a ,B .S . ,
& de Oliveira Soares, M. Evaluating ten years of management
effectiveness in a mangrove protected area.Ocean Coast. Manag.
125,2 9–37 (2016).
61. Spalding, M. D. et al. The role of ecosystems in coastal protection:
adapting to climate change and coastal hazards.Ocean Coast.
Manag. 90,5 0–57 (2014).
62. Jänes, H. et al. Quantifying ﬁsheries enhancement from coastal
vegetated ecosystems.Ecosyst. Serv. 43, 101105 (2020).
63. Jankowska, E., Pelc, R., Alvarez, J., Mehra, M. & Frischmann, C. J.
Climate beneﬁts from establishing marine protected areas targeted
at blue carbon solutions. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 119,
e2121705119 (2022).
64. Di Marco, M., Watson, J. E. M., Possingham, H. P. & Venter, O.
Limitations and trade-offs in the use of species distribution
maps for protected area planning. J. Appl. Ecol. 54,
402–411 (2017).
65. Runge, C. A. et al. Protected areas and global conservation of
migratory birds.Science 350,1 2 5 5–1258 (2015).
66. Mcdonald, R. I. et al. Urban effects, distance, and protected areas in
an urbanizing world. Landsc. Urban Plan. 93,6 3–
75 (2009).
67. Tilman, D. et al. Future threats to biodiversity and pathways to their
prevention.Nature 546,7 3–81 (2017).
68. Ewel, K., Twilley, R. & Ong, J. Different kinds of mangrove forests
provide different goods and services.Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. Lett.7,
83–94 (1998).
69. Dahdouh-Guebas, F. et al. Transitions in Ancient Inland Freshwater
Resource Management in Sri Lanka Affect Biota and Human Popu-
lations in and around Coastal Lagoons.Curr. Biol. 15,5 7 9–586
(2005).
7 0 . L e l e ,S . ,W i l s h u s e n ,P . ,B r o c k i n g t o n ,D . ,S e i d l e r ,R .&B a w a ,K .
Beyond exclusion: alternative approaches to biodiversity con-
servation in the developing tropics.Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain.2,
94–100 (2010).
71. Giakoumi, S. et al. Revisiting “success” and “failure” of marine
protected areas: a conservation scientist perspective.Front. Mar.
Sci. 5, 223 (2018).
72. Tran, T. C., Ban, N. C. & Bhattacharyya, J. A review of successes,
challenges, and lessons from Indigenous protected and conserved
areas. Biol. Conserv. 241, 108271 (2020).
73. Maxwell, S. L. et al. Area-based conservation in the twenty- ﬁrst
century. Nature 586,2 1 7–227 (2020).
74. Chaplin-Kramer, R. et al. Global modeling of nature’ s contributions
to people. Science 366,2 5 5–258 (2019).
75. Kukkala, A. S. & Moilanen, A. Ecosystem services and connectivity in
spatial conservation prioritization.Landsc. Ecol. 32,5 –14 (2017).
76. Massicotte, P. & South, A. rnaturalearth: World Map Data from Nat-
ural Earth. (2023).
77. Flanders Marine Institute. Maritime Boundaries Geodatabase: Mar-
itime Boundaries and Exclusive Economic Zones (200NM), version
11. https://doi.org/10.14284/386(2019).
78. R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Com-
puting. (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 2022).
79. IUCN. The IUCN Red List of Threat ened Species. Version 2022-12.
https://www.iucnredlist.org/resources/spatial-data-
download (2022).
80. Brooks, T. M. et al. Measuring Terrestrial Area of Habitat (AOH) and
Its Utility for the IUCN Red List. Trends Ecol. Evol. 34,
977–986 (2019).
81. Hanson, J. O. et al. Global conservation of species ’ niches. Nature
580,2 3 2–234 (2020).
82. Claes, J. et al. Valuing Nature Conservation(McKinsey & Com-
pany, 2022).
83. Friedrichs, M., Hermoso, V., Bremerich, V. & Langhans, S. D. Eva-
luation of habitat protection under the European Natura 2000
conservation network– The example for Germany. PLoS ONE 13,
e0208264 (2018).
84. Taylor, C., Cadenhead, N., Lindenmayer, D. B. & Wintle, B. A.
Improving the design of a conservation reserve for a critically
endangered species.PLoS ONE 12, e0169629 (2017).
85. Gilman, E. L., Ellison, J., Duke, N. C. & Field, C. Threats to mangroves
from climate change and adaptation options: a review.Aquat. Bot.
89,2 3 7–250 (2008).
86. Krueck, N. C. et al. Marine reserve targets to sustain and rebuild
unregulatedﬁsheries. PLoS Biol. 15, e2000537 (2017).
87. Mcleod, E. et al. A blueprint for blue carbon: toward an improved
understanding of the role of vegetated coastal habitats in seques-
tering CO
2. Front. Ecol. Environ.9, 552–560 (2011).
88. Hengl, T. et al. SoilGrids250m: global gridded soil information
based on machine learning.PLoS ONE 12, e0169748 (2017).
89. UNEP-WCMC. Protected areas map of the world, March 2022.www.
protectedplanet.net(2022).
90. Protected Planet. Calculating protected area and OECM coverage.
https://www.protectedplanet.net/en/resources/calculating-
protected-area-coverage(2021).
91. Hanson, J. O. wdpar: Interface to the World Database on Protected
Areas. (2021).
92. Shafer, C. L. Cautionary thoughts on IUCN protected area man-
agement categories V–VI. Glob. Ecol. Conserv. 3, 331–348 (2015).
93. Grorud-Colvert, K. et al. The MPA Guide: a framework to achieve
global goals for the ocean. Science 373, eabf0861 (2021).
94. Gurobi Optimization, LLC. Gurobi Optimizer Reference Man-
ual (2022).
95. Hengl, T. Predicted Soil Organic Carbon Stock at 30 m in t/ha for
0-100 cm Depth Global/update Of The Map Of Mangrove Forest Soil
Carbon. https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.1469347(2018).
96. Dabalà, A. et al. Priority Areas To Protect Mangroves And Maximise
Ecosystem Services - Code Release v.1.0.1. https://doi.org/10.5281/
ZENODO.8272951(2023).
Acknowledgements
A.D., K.C.V.B. and F.D.G. were supported by the Erasmus Mundus Joint
Master Degree in Tropical Biodiversity and Ecosystems– TROPIMUNDO,
which is funded by the European Commission. J.O.H. was supported by
Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC) and Nature Con-
servancy of Canada (NCC).
Author contributions
Conceptualisation by A.D., F.D.G., D.C.D., J.D.E., C.E.L., J.O.H., K.C.B.,
S.N. and A.J.R.; Methodology by A.D. and A.J.R.; Formal analysis by A.D.
and J.D.E.; Writing – original draft by A.D.; Writing– review & editing by
A.D., F.D.G., D.C.D., J.D.E., C.E.L., J.O.H., K.C.B., S.N. and A.J.R.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 13
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary informationThe online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3.
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Alvise Dabalà.
Peer review informationNature Communicationsthanks Paul Sutton,
and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s)for their contribution to the peer
review of this work. A peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’ s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’ s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visithttp://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 14