Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Priority areas to protect mangroves and
maximise ecosystem services
Alvise Dabalà 1,2,3 , Farid Dahdouh-Guebas 2,3,4,5,D a n i e lC .D u n n1,6,
Jason D. Everett 1,7,8, Catherine E. Lovelock 1,4, Jeffrey O. Hanson 9,
Kristine Camille V. Buenafe 1,6,7,S a n d r aN e u b e r t1,6,10 &
Anthony J. Richardson1,6,7
Anthropogenic activities threaten global biodiversity and ecosystem services.
Yet, area-based conservation efforts typically target biodiversity protection
whilst minimising conﬂict with economic activities, failing to consider eco-
system services. Here we identify priority areas that maximise both the pro-
tection of mangrove biodiversity and their ecosystem services. We reveal that
d e s p i t e1 3 . 5 %o ft h em a n g r o v ed i s t r i b u t i on being currently strictly protected,
all mangrove species are not adequately represented and many areas that
provide disproportionally large ecosystem services are missed. Optimising the
placement of future conservation efforts to protect 30% of global mangroves
potentially safeguards an additional 16.3billion USD of coastal property value,
6.1 million people, 1173.1 Tg C, and 50.7 million ﬁsher days yr
−1.O u r ﬁndings
suggest that there is a pressing need for including ecosystem services in
protected area design and that strategic prioritisation and coordination of
mangrove conservation could provide substantial beneﬁts to human
wellbeing.
Ecosystems provide many services to humanity, including food pro-
visioning, air and water puri ﬁcation and climate change mitigation 1.
These ecosystem services are threatened by global biodiversity loss
caused by anthropogenic activities such as urbanisation, agriculture
and ﬁshing
2. In 2011, a total of 194 countries agreed, via the Convention
of Biological Diversity Aichi Target 11, that by 2020 they would protect
at least 17% of their terrestrial systems and inland waters, and 10% of
their coastal zones and marine regions, by implementing protected
areas and other effective area-based conservation measures
3.D e s p i t e
failing to meet these targets, the ﬁrst draft of the post-2020 Global
Biodiversity Framework calls for 30% of the Earth to be protected to
conserve biodiversity and enhance nature ’s contribution to people
through ecosystem services4.
Historically, conservation has neglected ecosystem services 5.
Although efforts have been made to calculate the value of ecosystem
services provided by nature (e.g., Costanza et al. 6;C o s t a n z ae ta l .7),
data on ecosystem services are rarely included in conservation plans.
Most studies focus on adequately representing biodiversity whilst
minimising conﬂict with economic activities, such as avoiding popu-
lation centres, arable land or valuable ﬁshing areas
8,9. However,
Received: 9 September 2022
Accepted: 30 August 2023
Check for updates
1School of the Environment, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD, Australia.2Systems Ecology and Resource Management Research Unit (SERM),
Department of Organism Biology, Université Libre de Bruxelles - ULB, Av. F.D. Roosevelt 50, CPi 264/1, 1050 Brussels, Belgium.3Ecology & Biodiversity,
Laboratory of Plant Biology and Nature Management, Biology Department, Vrije Universiteit Brussel - VUB, Pleinlaan 2, VUB-APNA-WE, 1050 Brussels,Belgium.
4Mangrove Specialist Group (MSG), Species Survival Commission (SSC), International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), Zoological Societyo f
London, London, UK.5Interfaculty Institute of Social-Ecological Transitions, Université Libre de Bruxelles - ULB, Av. F.D. Roosevelt 50, 1050 Brussels, Belgium.
6Centre for Biodiversity and Conservation Science (CBCS), The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD, Australia.7Commonwealth Scientiﬁca n dI n d u s t r i a l
Research Organization (CSIRO) Environment, Queensland Biosciences Precinct (QBP), St Lucia, QLD, Australia.8Centre for Marine Science and Innovation
(CMSI), The University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.9Department of Biology, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada.10Institute of Computer
Science, Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany. e-mail: alvise.dab@gmail.com
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
recently there has been increasing interest in designing spatial plan-
ning approaches to maintain and enhance ecosystem services10–13.F o r
example, Jung et al. 10 used spatial prioritisation to identify areas on
land that protect both biodiversity and ecosystem services such as
carbon sequestration and freshwater provision. Sievers et al.13 identi-
ﬁed areas of co-occurrence of mangrove biodiversity and ecosystem
services. Similarly, Sala et al. 12 identiﬁed co-bene ﬁts in the ocean,
concentrating on protecting biodiversity whilst minimising carbon
remineralisation from trawling and maximising ﬁsheries bene ﬁts,
although aspects of that analysis have been criticised
14.A tl o c a la n d
regional scale, the same trend is observed, with multiple studies
including ecosystem services in their analysis or evaluating trade-offs
between ecosystem services
15–17. Despite this increasing interest, few
studies have identi ﬁed priority areas in coastal systems for safe-
guarding biodiversity and ecosystem services.
Mangroves are at the interface between the land and the sea,
providing several key ecosystem services18,19. The complex system of
roots and branches of mangroves helps protect coastal populations
and properties from ﬂooding, strong winds and extreme weather
20,21.
Mangrove roots also reduce erosion and increase accretion, promot-
ing stabilisation and establishment of coastal soil
20.A d d i t i o n a l l y ,
mangroves store carbon over the short term in their biomass and over
the long term in sediments
22. The carbon storage of mangroves
(0.096 Tg C km−2) is greater than that of other ecosystems on land
(rainforests 0.024 Tg C km−2; peat swamps 0.041 Tg C km−2)a n di nt h e
sea (saltmarshes 0.059 Tg C km −2; seagrasses 0.014 Tg C km −2)22.
Finally, the high productivity and physical complexity of mangrove
ecosystems make them important nursery grounds for many com-
mercial and non-commercial ﬁsh and invertebrate species, providing
employment and food for millions of people
23. Although in the current
analysis we focused on these ecosystem services (i.e., coastal protec-
tion, carbon storage and nursery grounds for ﬁsheries), mangroves
provide many other services, including tourism, wood and non-timber
forest products, recreation, socio-cultural services and waterﬁltration
and several disservices (negative effects of nature on people), includ-
ing those related to health, safety and security, leisure and recreation,
and materials (see Dahdouh-Guebas et al.
18 for more details). Although
mangroves clearly provide substantial bene ﬁts to people, priority
areas for protection to conserve biodiversity and ecosystem services
have not been identiﬁed globally.
Here we: (1) assess how well current protected areas represent
mangrove biodiversity and ecosystem services; (2) identify areas that,
if ef ﬁciently protected, could ensure the conservation of mangrove
biodiversity and the most ecosystem services, while selecting the
smallest area possible and (3) identify priority areas that could be
considered for the expansion of current mangrove protection. Tar-
geting protection in these areas of high biodiversity and ecosystem
services could provide substantial social, ecological and economic
beneﬁts
24, supporting coastal communities and livelihoods. Protection
of mangrove ecosystems has many positive effects, including species
conservation, preservation of carbon sinks, and enhanced spillover
effects leading to increased catch outside of protected areas
25,26.A r e a -
based conservation efforts can protect mangroves from clearing 27,
maintain the ecosystem services provided, and enhance resilience to
climate change
11,28. Our analysis considers ecosystem services, includ-
ing coastal protection to reduce future disaster risk21, carbon storage
to preserve carbon sinks and future carbon sequestration 29,30,a n d
ﬁsheries beneﬁts to guarantee food security for local communities 31.
To evaluate the beneﬁto fm a n g r o v e st oﬁsheries, our approach does
not consider the closure of ocean areas from ﬁshing but just the pro-
tection of mangroves from clearing to preserve their functioning and
the increase in catches that result. Importantly, the focus on ecosystem
services, rather than concentrating on minimising potential economic
conﬂicts with industry, seeks to prioritise bene ﬁts to local people.
Although global conservation analyses have been criticised for poor
performance at local scales
32, and lack of consideration of impacts on
local livelihoods and data justice issues33, we believe there is utility in
undertaking prioritisation at multiple scales34, from both a community-
driven and scientiﬁc perspective35. While the current study does not
purport to direct management at local scales, it could provide several
insights: guidance on how we are meeting societal goals and identi-
fying gaps in mangrove conservation; highlighting potential advan-
tages of mangrove conservation to many nations; informing priorities
and resources deployed by non-Governmental organisations; and sti-
mulating local and regional spatial planning with informed and prior
consultation of local stakeholders including indigenous peoples
36,37.
Using the prioritizr R package 38, we generated spatial prioritisa-
tions based on mangrove ecosystem service data from the best avail-
able global datasets
21,29–31. The prioritisations maximised the
protection of 65 mangrove species (see “Methods” section). The ana-
lysis was conducted on hexagonal planning units with a spatial reso-
lution of 20-km alongshore. Because there is no accepted deﬁnition of
what constitutes protection, we have used two separate deﬁnitions for
existing protection based on the IUCN categories in the World Data-
base on Protected Areas (WDPA)
39: strictly protected areas based on
IUCN categories I-IV; and less strictly protected areas based on all IUCN
categories from I to VI and unclassi ﬁed areas. Our prioritisations
ensured ecological representation by including ﬁne-scale maps of
mangrove cover from Global Mangrove Watch
40 at 25 m resolution,
intersected with mangrove species distributions from IUCN 41.T o
account for the variability in structure, height, and species diversity of
mangroves across different climates, tidal amplitudes and geomorphic
settings, we split the species distribution of each of the 65 mangrove
species across the biophysical typologies
42 and marine provinces of
the world43, resulting in 944 sub-species distributions each assigned a
speciﬁc conservation target. We assigned conservation targets (i.e., the
minimum area to protect for each species) based on the area of the
global distribution of mangrove species using a log
10-linear inter-
polation following Rodrigues et al.44 (see “Methods” section). Hence,
species with larger distribution ranges were assigned lower targets
than those with smaller ranges.
We ﬁrst examined the adequacy of existing protected areas for
conserving mangroves. We calculated ecosystem services provided by
mangroves in protected areas as the sum of the values provided by
previous studies
21,29–31. We then ran three series of prioritisations
optimised for the selection of areas that provide substantial beneﬁts in
terms of safeguarding biodiversity and associated ecosystem services.
These prioritisations were constrained by incremental area budgets
(i.e., the maximum area that can be selected) from 1% to 100% of the
current mangrove extent globally. This generated a nested set of
priority areas for protection, with each planning unit in the analysis
assigned a rank depending on when it was selected. Planning units with
ranks closer to one represent more important areas to biodiversity and
ecosystem services at the global scale. To assess the value of including
ecosystem services in the analysis, we then compared the results with a
prioritisation optimised for biodiversity protection only. We also ran
weighted prioritisations that favoured the selection of areas that pro-
vide more ecosystem services over areas that are important for bio-
diversity but provide fewer services (see“Methods” section). We then
analysed the efﬁciency (i.e., percentage of targets reached and amount
of ecosystem services provided per area of mangroves protected) of
these prioritisations.
Results
Coverage of biodiversity and ecosystem services in current
protected areas
The current global system of strictly protected area covers 13.5% of the
distribution of mangroves globally (Supplementary Fig. 1). This
increases to 43% of the global distribution of mangroves protected
when we also include protected areas under IUCN categories V, VI, and
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 2
those unclassiﬁed (Supplementary Fig. 2). Considering strictly pro-
tected areas, the coverage protected varies regionally: greatest pro-
tection is in the Americas (24.7%), with less protection in Oceania
(11.1%), Asia (10.9%) and Africa (3.5%; Fig. 1a). Currently, 11 countries
protect >70% of their mangrove area, including Taiwan (83.0%) and the
USA (77.5%), but 67 countries protect <10% of their mangroves,
including Vietnam (2.8%) and Thailand (<1%). Considering the top-10
countries with the greatest mangrove area, protection levels were
lower than the global mean coverage in Brazil (12.9%), Malaysia (8.8%),
India (<1%), Myanmar (<1%), Nigeria (<1%) and Papua New Guinea (<1%);
but higher in Mexico (21.2%), Australia (18.0%), Indonesia (16.1%) and
Bangladesh (14.5%). Similar results were observed at the continental
scale when we considered all protected areas, with greatest protection
in the Americas (72.4%) compared to other continents (~30%; Supple-
mentary Fig. 3). However, we observed a large variation at the country
scale, with 27 countries that protect >70% of their mangroves and 23
that protect <10%. This is the result of many countries having pro-
tected areas that are not strictly protected. For example, there is a
large increase in the mangroves considered protected in Brazil, from
12.9% under IUCN categories I-IV to 88.7% under all IUCN protection
categories. Further, the mean area of mangrove patches in strictly
protected planning units is 36% higher than in unprotected mangrove
units. This could be due to the preferential protection of areas with
more mangroves, which could potentially miss the protection of small
mangrove patches, or to higher deforestation and fragmentation in
mangroves outside protected areas.
Mangroves inside existing protected areas provide extensive
ecosystem services in different countries: greatest values of property
currently safeguarded from ﬂooding are in Taiwan (7.8 billion USD)
and Mexico (2.9 billion USD; Fig. 1b); the most people safeguarded
from ﬂooding are in Vietnam (0.25 million people) and Taiwan (0.17
million people; Fig. 1c); the greatest carbon is stored in Indonesia
(324.4 Tg C) and the USA (82.1 Tg C; Fig. 1d); and the most ﬁshers
supported by mangroves are in Indonesia (3.4 million ﬁsher days
year
−1) and Bangladesh (2.2 million ﬁsher days yr−1;F i g .1e).
A variable percentage of each ecosystem service is conserved in
the 13.5% of global mangrove distribution that is currently in protected
areas (Fig. 1b–e). Coastal property values are well represented in the
current system, which protects 24.9% of the total value globally
(amounting to 12.0 billion USD), and stored carbon is moderately well
represented, protecting 14.5% (980.8 Tg C). However, only 6.8% of the
total number of people near mangroves are safeguarded fromﬂooding
(0.64 million people), and 6.2% of the total ﬁsheries beneﬁt is pro-
tected (11.1 millionﬁsher days yr
−1). It is clear that the current system of
strictly protected areas was not developed to optimise protection
across all ecosystem services but avoided areas where large popula-
tions live.
Protection of global mangrove priority areas for biodiversity
and ecosystem services
When the current network of protected areas is ignored, global
mangrove priority areas identi ﬁed for protection ef ﬁciently max-
imise the combination of biodiversity and ecosystem services
(Fig. 2). These priority areas are broadly distributed (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 4a), but most high-priority areas (i.e., top-ranked 10% of
mangrove areas) are in Asia (75.4% of the mangrove area; Fig. 2b, e)
and Oceania (17.9%; Fig. 2d). This is a consequence of their high
mangrove species richness (Supplementary Fig. 5) and high levels of
ecosystem services (Supplementary Fig. 6). When we extend the
analysis to the mid-priority areas (i.e., top-ranked 30% of mangrove
areas), the selection was more-evenly distributed globally, with
additional mangroves selected in the Americas (26.4%) and Africa
(6.9%). There were also many mid-priority areas in Indonesia, India,
Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Thailand and Australia. This re ﬂects
the wealth of ecosystem services provided by mangroves in these
countries and the large areas occupied by mangroves (Supple-
mentary Figs. 4b –e and 6).
Considering priority areas identi ﬁed for conservation of biodi-
versity and ecosystem services, only 4.9% of the high priority and 12.1%
of the mid priority are within the current protected area system. Thus,
the existing protected area system has poor coverage of priority areas
(i.e., both <13.5%). More concerning is that the current protection only
reaches 6.8% (64 out of 944) of the conservation targets set for indi-
vidual mangrove species across biophysical typologies and biogeo-
graphic provinces (Fig. 3c). None of the species reaches all these
individual conservation targets. Therefore, the current system of
strictly protected areas neither meets reasonable conservation targets
for biodiversity nor efﬁciently conserves ecosystem services.
There was also extensive variability at the continental and country
scale in the ef ﬁciency of current protection of priority areas. In the
Americas, 30.4% of the high-priority areas are currently strictly pro-
tected, in Oceania 8.8%, while in Asia and Africa <2%. A total of 14
countries currently strictly protect >30% of their high-priority areas
but 63 countries do not protect any of them. Among the countries that
have the largest percentages of high-priority areas, only Taiwan
(83.0%) and Australia (21.1%) are strictly protecting >5% of those areas,
while India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, Papua New Guinea, Thai-
land and Vietnam strictly protect <5%.
Expanding protection by adding to the current protected area
system
As it is unlikely that current strictly protected areas will be moved, we
also analysed their expansion to protect 30% of the global mangrove
area
45,a sp r o p o s e db yt h e“30 by 30 ” target4. We used the same
approach as in the initial prioritisation: simultaneously maximising the
protection of biodiversity and preservation of ecosystem services
(Supplementary Fig. 7). We found that almost all priority areas to
expand the system to 30% are in Asia (63.6%) and Oceania (17.0%),
highlighting their high conservation value (Fig. 1a). At the country
level, the greatest protected area expansion was needed in Indonesia
(30.1%), Papua New Guinea (10.5%), India (9.5%), Panama (5.3%) and
Thailand (5.0%; Fig. 1a). Similarly, we analysed the expansion of the
current system of protected areas (including those that are not strictly
protected) to protect 50% of the global mangrove area (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 8). Results are similar, with most priority areas for the
expansion in Asia (74.5%) and Oceania (19.5%; Supplementary Fig. 3).
Ecosystem services provided by the proposed expansion to 30%
o ft h eg l o b a lm a n g r o v ea r e ah a st h ep o t e n t i a lt os a f e g u a r da n ds u s t a i n
an additional: 16.3 billion USD of coastal property value (33.7% of the
total amount represented by mangroves globally), 6.1 million people
(64.8%), 1173.1 Tg C (17.4%) and 50.7 million ﬁsher days year
−1 (28.6%;
Figs. 1b–e, 3d). Countries that provide most of these additional eco-
system services are India (6.1 billion USD, 2.1 million people, 14.3 mil-
lion ﬁsher days year −1), China (3.7 billion USD), Vietnam (2.9 million
people), Indonesia (460.0 Tg C), Papua New Guinea (156.0 Tg C) and
Bangladesh (7.0 millionﬁsher days year
−1; Fig. 1b–e).
The efﬁciency of including ecosystem services
The solution of the conservation plan that optimise selection for bio-
diversity and the one that optimise selection for both biodiversity and
ecosystem services were partially overlapping (Cohen’s Kappa index of
0.7, Supplementary Fig. 9). Remarkably, the ef ﬁciency of solutions
meeting conservation targets when optimising for both biodiversity
and ecosystem services was very similar to the efﬁciency of solutions
when optimising for biodiversity alone (Fig. 3a, c, e). For example, a
similar percentage of targets was reached by the expansion to 30% for
the protection of only biodiversity (81.0% of the target) and for bio-
diversity and ecosystem services (80.0%). Similar results were
observed across all area budgets. This seems to be related to higher
ecosystem services provisioning in areas of higher biodiversity (here
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 3
0
3
6
9
12 CameroonEritreaGambiaGNQGuinea-BissauMadagascarMozambique
Senegal
South Africa
Tanzania
Brazil
Colombia
Cuba
Honduras
Mexico
Nicaragua
PanamaSurinameUSAVenezuela
Bangladesh
Cambodia
China
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Myanmar
Philippines
Thailand
Vietnam
Australia
Fiji
Micronesia
New Caledonia
New ZealandPalau
PNG
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Vanuatu
Africa
Americas
Asia
Oceania
a) Mangrove area (thousands km )
2
0
2
4
6
8 BeninCôte d’IvoireGambiaGuineaMadagascarMozambique
Nigeria
Senegal
Sudan
Tanzania
Belize
Brazil
Cuba
Dom
inican RepublicGuadeloupe
GuyanaMexicoNicaraguaPanamaUSA
Bangladesh
ChinaIndia
Indonesia
PakistanPhilippinesSaudi Arabia
Taiwan
UEAVietnam
Australia
Fiji
Micronesia
New Caledonia
New ZealandPalau
PNG
Sa
moa
Solomon Islands
Vanuatu
Africa
Americas
Asia
Oceania
b) Properties (billions USD)
0
0.8
1.6
2.4
3.2 BeninCôte d’IvoireGambiaGui
nea
MadagascarMozambi
que
Nigeria
Senegal
Sudan
Tanzania
Brazil
Colombia
Cuba
Guyana
HondurasMexicoNicaraguaPanam
a
USAVenez
uela
Banglade
sh
ChinaIndia
Indonesia
Myanm
ar
Pakis
tan
PhilippinesSau
di Arab
iaTaiwanVietnam
Australia
Fiji
Micronesia
New Caledonia
New ZealandPalau
PNG
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Vanuatu
Africa
Americas
Asia
Oceania
c) Population (million people)
0
200
400
600
800 CameroonEritreaGambiaGNQGuinea-BissauMadagascar
Mozambique
Senegal
South Africa
Tanzania
Brazil
ColombiaCuba
HondurasMexicoNicar
aguaPanamaSurinameUSAVenezuela
Bangladesh
Cambodia
India
Indonesia
MalaysiaMyanm
ar
Philippines
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Vietnam
Australia
Fiji
Micronesia
New Caledonia
New 
Zealand
Palau
PNG
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Vanuatu
Africa
Americas
Asia
Oceania
d) Carbon (Tg)
0
3.75
7.5
11.25
15 Ango
la
BeninCameroonGambiaGNQMad
agasc
ar
Mozambique
Senegal
South A
frica
Tanzani
a
Brazil
Colombia
Costa Rica
Guat
emalaHond
urasMexicoNicaraguaPana
ma
USAVenezuela
Banglad
esh
Cambodia
China
India
Indone
sia
Mala
ysia
Myanmar
Sri Lanka
Thaila
ndVietnam
Australia
Fiji
Micronesia
New Caledonia
New Zea
land
Palau
PNG
Samoa
Solom
on IslandsVanuatu
Africa
Americas
Asia
Oceania
e) Fishing intensity (million fisher days yr−1)
Already protected areas
Expansion to 30%
GNQ = Republic of Equatorial Guinea
PNG = Papua New Guinea
UAE = United Arab Emirates
USA = United States of America
Fig. 1 | Cumulative mangrove area and cumulative ecosystem services, by
continent and country, for current strictly protected areas and for priority
areas added to the current system. aMangrove area and (b–e) ecosystem services
provided by current strictly protected areas (dark shade) and priority areas to
expand the current system to 30% coverage (light shade) resulting from a prior-
itisation that maximises protection of biodiversity and ecosystem services. Only the
top-10 countries per continent are shown: (a)b ym a n g r o v ea r e aa n d(b–e)b y
amount of ecosystem services provided.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41333-3
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:5863 4
estimated by species richness) that drive the selection of mangrove
areas that provide more ecosystem services. This could be explained
by higher functional diversity in areas of higher species richness, which
can guarantee the provisioning of multiple services.
Nonetheless, in the prioritisation that weighed (i.e., increase the
probability of selection of a certain feature) the ecosystem services
more than biodiversity, we observed an even steeper rise in the ser-
vices selected at the beginning of the prio