Annals of Botany 125: 213–234, 2020
doi: 10.1093/aob/mcz161, available online at www.academic.oup.com/aob
Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Annals of Botany Company 2019. This work is 
written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain in the US.
Tropical cyclones and the organization of mangrove forests: a review
Ken W. Krauss* ,  and Michael J. Osland
U.S. Geological Survey, Wetland and Aquatic Research Center, 700 Cajundome Blvd, Lafayette, LA, USA
*For correspondence. E-mail kraussk@usgs.gov
Received: 9 March 2019 Returned for revision: 5 August 2019 Editorial decision: 25 September 2019 Accepted: 3 October 2019 
Published electronically 11 October 2019
• Background Many mangrove ecosystems are periodically exposed to high velocity winds and surge from trop-
ical cyclones, and often recover with time and continue to provide numerous societal benefits in the wake of storm 
events.
• Scope This review focuses on the drivers and disturbance mechanisms (visible and functional) that tropical cyc-
lones of various intensities have on mangrove ecosystem properties around the world, as well as the potential eco-
system services role offered by mangroves along storm-ravaged coastlines. When viewed together, studies describe 
repeatable types of impact and a variety of responses of mangroves that make them ecologically resilient to high 
velocity winds, and which have served to advance the notion that mangroves are disturbance-adapted ecosystems.
• Conclusions Studies have documented massive tree mortality and forest structural shifts as well as high vari-
ability of spatial effects associated with proximity and direction of the tropical cyclone trajectory that influence 
biogeochemical processes, recovery of individual trees, and forest regeneration and succession. Mangroves pro-
vide coastal protection through surge and wind suppression during tropical cyclones, and yet are able to overcome 
wind effects and often recover unless some alternative environmental stress is at play (e.g. hydrological alteration 
or sedimentation). Structural elements of mangroves are influenced by the legacies imposed by past tropical cyc-
lone injury, which affect their current appearance, and presumably their function, at any point in time. However, 
much is yet to be discovered about the importance of the effects of tropical cyclones on these fascinating botanical 
ecosystems, including the role of storm-based sediment subsidies, and much more effort will be needed to predict 
future recovery patterns as the frequency and intensity of tropical cyclones potentially change.
Key words: Mangrove wetlands, hurricane, regeneration, storm visible effects, surge, tropical storm, typhoon, 
recovery.
INTRODUCTION
Mangrove ecosystems occur throughout many tropical, sub-
tropical and warm temperate regions of the world, and represent 
a unique botanical community comprised of a number of dis-
tinctive growth forms (Tomlinson, 2016). Mangroves have even 
expanded their distribution within warm temperate locations glo-
bally, facilitated by a prolonged post-Pleistocene recolonization 
period (Sherrod and McMillan, 1985; Woodroffe and Grindrod, 
1991; Kennedy et  al., 2016), accentuated by higher minimum 
winter temperatures at progressively higher latitudes over the late 
Holocene and Anthropocene (Osland et al., 2013; Saintilan et al., 
2014). Taxonomically, mangroves are comprised of approx. 70 
species or putative hybrids (Duke et al., 1998), and include tree, 
shrub, fern and palm life forms, collectively creating the potential 
for structural adaptability and resilience to major disturbances. In 
a recent review, 45 % of reported disturbances to mangrove area 
in the global literature were attributed to tropical cyclones (Sippo 
et al., 2018), ranking tropical cyclones as perhaps the top non-
anthropogenic disturbance they must endure.
Tropical cyclone effects on mangrove ecosystems, while 
disruptive, are often not long lived, as some tree species can 
re-sprout quickly (e.g. Avicennia), while others rely on advance 
regeneration strategies (e.g. seedlings present prior to storm 
events) or post-storm seeding. Mangroves are described as 
disturbance-adapted communities (Lugo et al., 1981) and are 
often considered ecologically stable (Alongi, 2008), suggesting 
that they are able to take on structural disruptions from peri-
odic storms and recover. Where tropical cyclone disturbance 
frequency is more intense (e.g. parts of the Caribbean region), 
mangrove structural complexity is reduced to lower statured 
canopies with few canopy emergents (Lugo and Snedaker, 
1974). Where cyclone disturbance is rare (e.g. some Pacific is-
lands, Panama), structural biomass and complexity can increase 
over time (Allen et al., 2001; Simard et al., 2019).
However, when the complexity of a mangrove is com-
promised by environmental modifications, especially those 
influencing tidal hydrological boundaries and characteris-
tics, resistance to tropical cyclone disturbance is also com-
promised, making individual cyclone events potentially more 
impactful (V ogt et al., 2012; Lewis et al., 2016). Initial system 
properties matter tremendously, such that tropical cyclones 
with similar meteorological metrics affect the same mangrove 
REVIEW: PART OF A SPECIAL ISSUE ON COASTAL FLOODING AND STORM RISKS
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
214
forest differently based on conditions imposed by past disturb-
ance (Peters et al., 2011). The legacy of past tropical cyclone 
disturbance and recovery in mangroves often defines the cur -
rent ecosystem state, and this disturbance legacy is part of the 
ecology of mangrove forests in many locations.
Science programmes and policies have targeted mangrove 
ecosystems over the last few decades as structural protection 
afforded to coastal communities from wind, surge and tsunamis 
have become more evident (Danielsen et al., 2005; Dahdouh-
Guebas et al., 2005; Das and Vincent, 2009). Along with pro-
tection for humans living in disturbance-prone environments, 
additional incentives for mangrove conservation related to 
carbon storage and flux have emerged as mangroves have also 
been identified as important components of the global carbon 
cycle (Bouillon et al., 2008; Donato et al., 2011). Because of 
these values attributed to mangroves, protection, rehabilitation 
and restoration activities have helped to reduce global man-
grove area losses on an annual basis from the 1970s to the pre-
sent (Friess et al., 2019). While this is seemingly good news, 
reports are nuanced by very high annual mangrove losses in 
specific regions (e.g. Indonesia, Malaysia and Myanmar; Feller 
et al., 2017), and an uncertain future for mangroves with cli-
mate change (Ward et  al., 2016). In some regions, climate 
change is expected to increase the frequency of the most intense 
tropical cyclones, increase the amount of rainfall produced by 
tropical cyclones near the cyclone centre and increase the pole-
ward distribution of tropical cyclones (Knutson et  al., 2010, 
2015; Christensen et al., 2013; Sobel et al., 2016; Kossin et al. 
2017; Patricola and Wehner, 2018).
Tropical cyclones affect nearly every aspect of the ecosystem 
services that mangroves provide; for example, in protecting in-
frastructure, in provisioning of wildlife habitat and in carbon 
sequestration. Yet, storm influences on this ecosystem have not 
received comprehensive review. Here, we will define tropical 
cyclones, explain where they occur, describe their influences on 
mangrove ecosystem properties and relevant disturbance mech-
anisms, and describe cyclone–mangrove interactions with surge 
suppression, sea-level rise and climate change. We will end this 
review with a conceptual diagram detailing mechanistically 
what it means to be ‘disturbance-adapted’ and suggest avenues 
for impactful future tropical cyclone research on mangroves.
DEFINING TROPICAL CYCLONES
Across the world, tropical cyclones are described using sev-
eral different names and classification systems. As a result, the 
literature describing cyclone effects on mangrove forests uses 
different terms that are location dependent (e.g. hurricane, ty-
phoon or cyclone). Hurricane is the name used for powerful 
tropical cyclones (i.e. winds speeds that exceed 119 km h
–1) 
in the Atlantic Ocean and north-eastern Pacific Ocean. In con-
trast, typhoon is used to describe powerful tropical cyclones 
in the north-western Pacific Ocean. In the Indian Ocean and 
south-western Pacific Ocean, powerful tropical cyclones are 
called tropical cyclones, with the addition of a location-specific 
modifier to indicate intensity (e.g. severe or very intense). In 
many areas, less powerful tropical cyclones are called trop-
ical depressions (low wind speeds) or tropical storms (mod-
erate wind speeds). Cyclone classification systems typically 
use maximum sustained wind speeds to designate classifica-
tion categories. For example, the Saffir–Simpson hurricane 
wind scale uses wind speeds to categorize hurricanes into five 
groups (nhc.noaa.gov): Category 1 (119–153 km h
–1), Category 
2 (154–177 km h –1), Category 3 (178–208 km h –1), Category 
4 (209–251 km h –1) and Category 5 (≥252 km h –1). In this re-
view, we use the term ‘tropical cyclone’ in a general manner. 
However, when referring to intensity, we typically use the 
Saffir–Simpson categories.
WHERE DO TROPICAL CYCLONES AFFECT 
MANGROVES?
There are many regions of the world where mangrove forests 
are never affected by tropical cyclones due to climatic condi-
tions that prevent tropical cyclone formation (Fig. 1; note the 
blue areas not crossed by red, orange or yellow tropical cyclone 
tracks). For example, tropical cyclones rarely affect mangrove 
forests in Africa, South America, Indonesia and Papua New 
Guinea. In contrast, there are certain cyclonic hot spots, where 
mangrove forests are greatly influenced by recurrent tropical 
cyclones (Fig. 1; note the blue areas surrounded by red, orange 
and yellow cyclone tracks). Hamilton and Casey (2016) pro-
vided a ranked list of the 20 countries with the largest mangrove 
areas. Our global map of tropical cyclone pathways (Fig. 1) 
indicates that the following seven of these 20 mangrove-rich 
countries are also affected by tropical cyclones: Australia, 
Mexico, Myanmar, Philippines, Bangladesh, Cuba and the 
USA (ranked in descending order according to mangrove area). 
In terms of aerial cover, these are the seven countries where the 
effects of tropical cyclones on mangroves are potentially lar -
gest. However, in terms of local effects, there are many smaller 
countries (e.g. Bahamas, Guadeloupe, Honduras, Belize and 
Haiti) where mangrove forest effects can be large due to their 
position within common cyclonic pathways.
INFLUENCES ON SYSTEM PROPERTIES
General descriptions of structural effects on forests from max-
imum sustained winds of specific intensities from tropical cyc-
lones have been developed (Myers and van Lear, 1998). We 
have modified those for application to mangroves (Table 1). 
While difficulties arise when generalizing effects because of 
variation in geomorphology, tornadic wind downbursts, man-
grove forest height and stand condition, two things should be 
noted from this table.
First, tropical cyclones with Category 3 windspeeds or higher 
(≥178 km h
–1) cause extreme visible effects on mangroves, al-
most without exception. Mangroves are positioned in wet soils 
and many species have dense wood (Chapman, 1976). Critical 
wind speeds >178 km h
–1 often force tip-ups along with more 
prominent breakage of large trees (Roth, 1992; Aung et  al., 
2013), which subsequently fall on small trees and break them. 
In spite of this, smaller trees and saplings missed by falling 
trees and branches, and sometimes inundated by storm surge, 
can survive cyclones. Thus, smaller statured mangrove forests 
and trees in canopy gaps can appear more resistant to structural 
effects because they are positioned lower within the vertical 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
215
boundary layer to allow some wind buffering (Smith et  al., 
1994). However, if Category 4 wind speeds (>210 km h –1) or 
higher are realized, dominant forest trees are often laid down 
(broken or tipped-up) and buffering of smaller trees from the 
wind is no longer ensured. While smaller statured forests may 
appear less affected than taller forests at windspeeds of 178–
208 km h
–1, post-storm recovery may be slower in forests with 
reduced growth potential.
Secondly, visible tropical cyclone effects on mangroves can 
be striking before they become extreme (Fig. 2A, B). The phys-
ical change imposed by storm-generated surges vs. the protec-
tion provided by complete submergence from surge can lead 
to swathes of visible effects in some fringing locations but not 
others, confounding spatial resolution of impact. While damage 
to built structures might even be light in some cases, injury to 
mangroves, especially those in poor condition prior to the cyc-
lone (Odum and Johannes, 1975; Lewis et al., 2016), can be 
overwhelming to the casual observer (Fig. 2C). Thus, reactions 
are often negative (Smith et al., 1994), but herein we offer con-
text; most mangroves within the repetitive storm-track areas 
shown in Fig. 1 have sustained cyclone impacts previously, and 
they have already recovered to what they are now. When left in 
their natural and unaltered state, mangroves often recover from 
tropical cyclones.
Tree mortality
Tree mortality was 25–100 % over a mangrove area of approx. 
40 000 ha from Hurricane Donna, which made landfall in south 
Florida in 1960 (Craighead and Gilbert, 1962). Likewise, man-
grove tree mortality from tropical cyclone events ranged from 
zero to 100 % among published accounts since (Table 2). Tree 
mortality can continue for months (delayed mortality) after a 
cyclone makes landfall (Smith et al., 1994), so post-assessment 
dates need to be considered. Notable among mortality accounts 
are the muddled correlations between the intensity of a tropical 
cyclone based on simple descriptors (e.g. maximum sustained 
wind speeds) and realized mortality in any specific mangrove 
stand. For example, mortality ranged from 0 to 86 % from 
Typhoon Haiyan as it affected the Philippines with some of the 
strongest winds ever recorded in mangroves (Primavera et al., 
2016). Structural complexity, hydrogeomorphic setting, ante-
cedent environmental change, orographic positioning and angle 
of cyclone trajectory relative to forest location generate a spatial 
signature of response to (or effects of) tropical cyclones that not 
only translates into differences in recovery and regeneration, 
but also confounds cause–effect predictability. That a single 
site in Primavera et al. (2016) registered no visible effects from 
such an intense storm is notable. Modelling has sorted some of 
this complexity by incorporating better storm wind character -
istics at finer resolutions (e.g. Doyle and Girod, 1997), but it is 
clear that generalizing degrees of responses from tropical cyc-
lones should be cautioned.
Differences in tolerances among mangrove species to wind 
throw also contribute to disparity of effects. This is expected, as 
tropical cyclones are not considered a stressor per se, but rather 
wind, rain, surge and excessive sedimentation are the stressors, 
and those are spatially delivered in vastly different ways during 
tropical cyclone events. Among neotropical mangroves, histor-
ical accounts suggested that Laguncularia racemosa was more 
susceptible to tropical cyclone effects than Rhizophora mangle 
(Wadsworth and Englerth, 1959); however, this trend has not 
always held up in the greater Caribbean region (Table 2).  
Accounts of differential tree species mortality from Cyclone 
Nargis, which affected the Ayeyarwady Delta in Myanmar as 
a Category 3 storm, were much more distinct than the multiple 
accounts from the Caribbean region. Bruguiera sexangula and 
Rhizophora apiculata trees experienced >90 % mortality, while 
mortality was far less for Excoecaria agallocha, Sonneratia 
caseolaris, Heritiera fomes and Avicennia officinalis, all of 
which had >85 % survival (Aung et al., 2013). Results from the 
Caribbean region suggest that the characteristics of the cyclone 
vs. site conditions greatly influence species-ranked suscepti-
bility outcomes during tropical cyclones (Table 2). In contrast, 
results from the old world tropics generally support suggestions 
150°W
30°N
0°
30°S
Saffir–Simpson hurricane
Wind scale category
Mangrove12 34 5
120°W 90°W 60°W 30°W 30°E 60°E 90°E 120°E 150°E 180°0°
Fig. 1. Global distribution of tropical cyclone storm tracks in the northern and southern hemispheres along with Saffir–Simpson scale 
categories. The distribution of mangroves is depicted by blue shading (from Giri et  al., 2011), and reveals those mangrove areas that are subjected to 
tropical cyclone impact on a recurring basis. Saffir–Simpson scale wind speeds are as follows: Category 1, 119–153 km h–1; Category 2, 154–177 km h–1; Category 
3, 178–208 km h–1; Category 4, 209–251 km h–1; Category 5, ≥252 km h–1. Tropical cyclone track data are from Knapp et al. (2010).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
216
Table 1. Generalized mangrove forest damage descriptions relative to Saffir–Simpson tropical cyclone intensity ratings  
(after Myers and van Lear, 1998).
Category Wind speed, km h–1 Description
1 119–153 (74–95 miles h–1) Shrubby mangroves, trees and foliage are damaged, but lightly, with few being fully susceptible to mortality 
through stem breakage or tip-ups. Litter and small branch fall limited to weaker structures or species with less 
dense wood, and is probably compensatory to what would fall ordinarily in the coming months. Seedlings and 
saplings with minor damage, but not generally from wind vs. woody debris, tree/branch fall and surge. Surge 
to 1.2–1.5 m above normal. Wrack deposition limited but notable, probably containing re-deposited mangrove 
seeds (when applicable) and propagules. Sedimentation low with minimal contributions from re-suspended 
estuarine components. Coastal built structures (e.g. piers and signs) sustain minor damage. Roads that are low 
lying are inundated, especially if storm impacts at high tide. No peat collapse expected after the storm.
2 154–177 (96–110 miles h
–1) Shrubby mangroves, trees and foliage damaged considerably, with many large trees blown down through stem 
snapping (especially trees of lighter wood densities) and tip-ups. Litter and branch fall extensive and includes 
compensatory and additive components to what would fall ordinarily in the coming months. Seedlings 
and saplings with moderate damage, sustaining only small portion of that damage from wind vs. woody 
debris, tree/branch fall and surge. Surge to 1.8–2.4 m above normal. Wrack deposition extensive, containing 
re-deposited mangrove seeds (when applicable), propagules, wood, seagrass, shells, human-sourced debris, 
etc. Sedimentation moderate and would include re-suspended estuarine components, especially if surrounding 
estuaries are shallow (<2–3 m deep). Considerable damage to coastal built structures, with many roads being 
inundated 2–4 h in advance of the approaching storm. Peat collapse expected after the storm only in forests of 
lower productivity from previous human impact.
3 178–208 (111–130 miles h
–1) Mangroves of all sizes highly susceptible to wind fall as they reach a wind velocity threshold established by 
Category 3 designation (Doyle et al., 1995), especially species with lighter wood densities; nearly all large 
trees blown down or snapped, and smaller trees and shrubs sustaining moderate to heavy damage, often having 
damage to vascular structures if they do not break. Litter and branches ripped from trees, with extensive 
additive volumes of debris fall, affecting growth phenology of surviving mangrove trees into the next few 
growing seasons. Seedlings with moderate damage and saplings with heavy damage from wind, woody debris, 
tree/branch fall and surge. Surge to 2.7–3.6 m above normal. Wrack deposition extensive, containing similar 
elements to Category 2 storms but also including larger debris (e.g. trees) and larger human-sourced debris 
capable of physically damaging the mangrove forest. Sedimentation extensive (up to 40 mm) from upland, 
resuspended and autochthonous sources capable of covering emergent root lenticels. Great damage to coastal 
built structures, with debris from that damage infiltrating mangrove forests from wind throw and water. Most 
roads are inundated 3–5 h in advance of the approaching storm. Peat collapse expected in some forests after 
the storm, and imminent in forests of lower productivity from previous human impact.
4 2109–251 (131–155 miles h
–1) All trees are affected extensively, with most trees and shrubs blown down or snapped, and saplings and smaller 
trees often sheared off (Craighead and Gilbert, 1962) in lieu of simply sustaining damage to vascular 
structures. Canopy loss of foliage and small branches extensive, both leading to delayed mortality of small 
surviving trees from foliage loss and affecting growth phenology for surviving mangrove trees into the 
next few growing seasons. Seedlings and saplings with moderate to heavy damage from all sources, often 
having to re-adjust to post-storm light intensities through new leaf development in order to ensure survival. 
Surge to 3.9–5.5 m above normal, submerging small statured mangrove forests aligning fringe locations 
with ocean water and serving (paradoxically) to buffer those small trees from wind damage in some cases. 
Terrestrial flooding extending to approx. 10 km inland. Wrack deposition extensive, containing similar 
elements to Category 2 storms but also including larger debris (e.g. trees) and larger human-sourced debris 
that physically damages the mangrove forest. Sedimentation even more extensive (up to 40–60 mm) from 
upland, resuspended and autochoctanous sources capable of covering emergent root lenticels and, in some 
cases, facilitating deposition of intact sections of soil from nearby damaged wetlands on top of the forest 
floor. Catastrophic damage to coastal built structures (including many homes), with debris from that damage 
infiltrating mangrove forests from wind throw and water. Roads are inundated 3–5 h in advance of the 
approaching storm. Beach erosion extensive, with new channels being forged through creeks and barrier 
islands, especially those areas without significant mangrove colonization. Peat collapse imminent after storm.
5 ≥252 (> 155 miles h
–1) Catastrophic damage incurred by mangrove forests, with 90–100 % destruction being noted in eyewall and 
immediate right quadrat areas in the northern hemisphere or left quadrat areas in the southern hemisphere. 
Shrubby mangroves, trees and saplings destroyed with only a few remaining seedlings, probably damaged 
by debris falling from broken canopies and debris in surge. Surge to >5.5 m above normal, submerging 
small statured mangrove forests aligning fringe locations with ocean water and serving (paradoxically) to 
buffer trees from wind damage in some cases. Terrestrial flooding extending to approx. 16 km inland. Wrack 
deposition extensive, containing similar elements to Category 2 storms but also including larger debris (e.g. 
trees) and larger human-sourced debris that physically damages the mangrove forest. Sedimentation extensive 
(>60 mm) from upland, resuspended and autochoctanous sources capable of covering lenticels on large 
segments of prop roots and entire pneumatophore structures, and facilitating deposition of intact sections of 
soil from nearby damaged wetlands deposited on top of the forest floor. Catastrophic damage to coastal built 
structures (including many homes, municipal structures and roads), with debris from that damage infiltrating 
mangrove forests from wind throw and water. Roads are inundated 4–7 h in advance of the approaching storm. 
Extensive beach erosion with and without established vegetation, with new channel formation through barrier 
islands and mangrove forests. Extensive surge and wave scouring evident, undermining mangrove roots. Peat 
collapse guaranteed after storm.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
217
by Woodroffe and Grime (1999) that mangrove species in the 
family Rhizophoraceae (Rhizophora and Bruguiera) may 
be more susceptible to tropical cyclone effects than families 
such as Avicenniaceae. Perhaps the greater number of species 
in these families within the old world tropics allow for more 
prominent species-level trends to emerge at specific threshold 
wind intensities.
Forest structure
Plot-level assessments of mortality and basal area reductions 
after a tropical cyclone make use of at least three different ap-
proaches: (1) plots are established before the cyclone affects 
the mangrove forest, with effects being measured in time after 
the cyclone (e.g. Sherman et al., 2001); (2) plots are established 
after the cyclone affects the mangrove forest, with pre-effect 
structure surmised by re-constructing structure from tipped-up 
or broken stems (e.g. Smith et al., 1994); and (3) plots are es-
tablished in different locations relative to storm trajectory, con-
trolling for cyclone influences in space (e.g. Kauffman and 
Cole, 2010). Some assessments combine these approaches (e.g. 
Doyle et al., 1995). Those techniques that include spatial vari-
ability in cyclone effects are likely to be most useful overall 
because they will translate as new remote-sensing technologies 
are developed, possibly even leading to less reliance on post-
cyclone field surveys in the future.
Mangrove forest structure can be substantially altered by 
cyclone-induced mortality. In some cases, for example stands 
with smaller statured trees, lower forest structure can buffer 
stands against major wind pulses. Taller trees were more likely 
than shorter trees to suffer breakage from Hurricane Joan in 
Nicaragua (Roth, 1992), and 70 % of larger adult mangrove 
trees suffered broken stems in lieu of being uprooted during 
Cyclone Nargis in Myanmar (Aung et al., 2013). Both McCoy 
et al. (1996) and Smith et al. (1994) suggested that taller trees 
were more susceptible to windthrow in their post-hurricane sur-
veys, but Sherman et al. (2001) suggested that size influences 
among these same mangrove species were more difficult to 
discern in the Dominican Republic during Hurricane Georges. 
Species present on site also matter for recovery; snapped 
stems of R. mangle (and Rhizophora spp.) equate to mortality, 
as they are not able to coppice or sprout in other ways (Gill 
and Tomlinson, 1969), while mangroves of genera Avicennia, 
Sonneratia, Xylocarpus, Excoecaria, Lumnitzera, Laguncularia 
and Conocarpus readily coppice or sprout (Snedaker, 2002).
Roth (1992) described structural effects and tracked recovery 
of mangroves for 17  months after Hurricane Joan affected 
Nicaragua in 1988. There, 45 % of mangroves had broken 
trunks, and only 41 % of the mangroves began to re-foliate 
17 months after the storm. Because larger trees had a greater fre-
quency of broken stems than smaller trees, Hurricane Joan sig-
nificantly altered the basal area of the mangroves. Re-foliation 
was registered by smaller trees, suggesting some wind resili-
ence by smaller size classes (Roth, 1992), which would spark 
recovery. Doyle et al. (1995) assessed mangrove forest struc-
ture after Hurricane Andrew affected south Florida in 1992 
by stratifying data collection into eyepath, right quadrat and 
A
B
C
Fig. 2. Examples of the visual damage incurred by mangrove forests 
from tropical cyclones. (A) Depicts a Bruguiera  gymnorrhiza  forest 
at the mouth of Saddok Tasi Stream on the Pacific island of Saipan 
approx. 15  months after Typhoon Soudelor affected the island on 2 August 
2015 showing individual tree damage, some re-sprouting and seedling regen-
eration (photo: K. W. Krauss, U.S. Geological Survey). (B and C) Photographs 
depict predominantly Rhizophora mangle forests along the fringes of Princess 
Bay (Hurricane Hole) and Leinster Bay (Annaberg Swamp), respectively, on 
the Caribbean island of St. John (US Virgin Islands) approx. 14 months after 
Hurricane Irma affected the island on 7 September 2017, showing a range of re-
sponses from (B) defoliation, some mid-storey tree survival and limited regen-
eration, to (C) large structural effects, ponding and few signs of regeneration 
(photos: Andrew S., From U.S. Geological Survey).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
218Table 2. Summary of mangrove forest mortality from tropical cyclones.
Location Cyclone name Category Maximum sustained 
windspeed, km h–1
Location* Species† Mortality, %‡ Reference
Isla del Venado, 
Nicaragua
Joan 4 217 Transects 1–3 AV G E 37 Roth (1992)
    Transects 1–3 LARA 53  
    Transects 1–3 RHMA 56  
Southwest Florida, 
USA
Andrew 4 232 Eyepath A VGE, LARA, RHMA 16–61 Doyle et al. (1995)
    Right quadrat A VGE, LARA, RHMA 3–28  
    Left quadrat A VGE, LARA, RHMA 2–15  
South Florida, USA Andrew 4 232 Everglades National 
Park
AV G E 12–66 Smith et al. (1994); Baldwin 
et al. (1995); McCoy et al. 
(1996)
    Everglades National 
Park
LARA 18–90  
    Everglades National 
Park
RHMA 21–90  
Guadeloupe Island Hugo 4 160–230 Coastal fringe RHMA 59 Imbert et al., 1996
    Mixed dwarf RHMA, LARA, A VGE 26  
    Tall mixed RHMA 78  
    Black AV G E 3  
Dominican Republic Georges 3 194 Los Haitises National 
Park
AV G E 64 Sherman et al. (2001)
    Los Haitises National 
Park
LARA 26  
    Los Haitises National 
Park
RHMA 50  
Pacific coast, Mexico Rosa 2 167 Agua Grande RHMA, LARA, A VGE 27 Kovacs et al. (2001)
    Ilsa La Palma RHMA, LARA, A VGE 37  
    Canas RHMA, LARA, A VGE 31  
    Chantilla RHMA, LARA, A VGE 28  
    Punta Burro RHMA, LARA, A VGE 30  
Bay Islands, 
Honduras
Mitch 4 188–260 High impact, Fringe RHMA, LARA, A VGE 100 Cahoon et al. (2003)
    High impact, Basin RHMA, LARA, A VGE 100  
    Medium impact, 
Fringe
RHMA, LARA, A VGE 0–94  
    Medium impact, 
Basin
RHMA, LARA, A VGE 0–50  
    Low impact, Fringe RHMA, LARA, A VGE 0–5  
    Low impact, Basin RHMA, LARA, A VGE 0–15  
Yap, Micronesia Sudal 3 - 4 177 - 209 Windard sites RHAP, SOAL, BRGY 10–27 Kauffman and Cole (2010)
   119 - 151 Leeward sites RHAP, SOAL, BRGY 3–8  
Cape Bolinao, 
Philippines
Chan-hom 2 85–150 11-year-old plantation RHMU 61 Salmo et al. (2014)
    18-year-old plantation RHMU 69  
Eastern Samar, 
Philippines
Haiyan 5 305 Maslog, Lawaan RHAP, RHMU 30 Primavera et al. (2016)
    Sto. Nino, 
Quinapondan
BRGY , RHAP, AECO 7  
    Anahaw, General 
MacArthur
SOAL, AEFL 20  
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
219
left quadrat sections relative to the path of the hurricane. On 
average, basal area was reduced from 26.4 to 12.2 m2 ha–1, or by 
approx. 54 %, within eyepath plots compared with approx. 17 
% in right and left quadrat plots (Doyle et al., 1995).
Basal areas were reduced from 18.3 to 7 m
2 ha –1 on three 
of four mangrove forest sites on Guadeloupe Island when 
Hurricane Hugo made landfall in 1989. Imbert et  al. (1996) 
divided the mangrove zone into coastal fringe, mixed dwarf, 
tall mixed and black (i.e. referring to the black mangrove spe-
cies: A. germinans). While the black mangrove zone was nearly 
unaffected by the tropical cyclone (3 % reduction), overall 
basal area reductions to the other three zones averaged 23–68 
%. The lower percentage was registered in the dwarf stand of 
lower height. Surveyed upland forests also had fewer visible 
effects than the mangroves, with Guadeloupe’s upslope rain-
forests averaging 11 % and semi-evergreen forests averaging 
12 % basal area reductions (Imbert et al., 1996). Sherman et al. 
(2000) divided the mangrove forests of the Dominican Republic 
into R.  mangle-, L.  racemosa- and A.  germinans-dominated 
zones along two transects. Plots were established in 1994 and 
Hurricane Georges made landfall 4 years later in 1998. Basal 
areas were reduced by 68 % in the three plots dominated by 
A.  germinans (from 20.4 to 6.6 m
2 ha –1), by 44 % in the 12 
plots dominated by R. mangle (from 23.8 to 13.4 m 2 ha–1) and 
by 19 % in the four plots dominated by L. racemosa (from 40.9 
to 33.0 m 2 ha –1) (Sherman et  al., 2001). Visible effects were 
less on the L. racemosa forest in that instance, presumably be-
cause wind resistance was provided by an even L.  racemosa 
canopy (Sherman et al., 2001). Canopy structuring potentially 
explains discrepancies in interspecies susceptibilities found 
among studies (e.g. Smith et  al., 1994; Imbert et  al., 1996). 
Collectively, these studies reiterate that the effects of tropical 
cyclones on mangroves can be highly case specific.
Kovacs et  al. (2001) established five transects relative to 
the passage of Hurricane Rosa on the Pacific coast of Mexico 
and discovered that basal area was also reduced by 32–71 % 
depending on the location of the mangrove forest relative to 
the storm’s track. Again, species presence was important and 
few small diameter trees were uprooted; when stems were 
broken, all R.  mangle died and, when larger trees were up-
rooted, L. racemosa fared better (39 % dead) than A. germinans 
(77 % dead) (Kovacs et  al., 2001). On the Island of Yap 
(Micronesia), Typhoon Sudal affected the mangrove forests in 
2004. Kauffman and Cole (2010) established study plots after 
the storm based upon cyclone trajectory and discovered that 
plots established on the leeward side of the storm had very high 
basal areas of 72 m
2 ha–1 but, in comparison, plots established 
on the windward side of the storm had lower basal areas of 54 
m
2 ha–1. Tropical cyclone effects led to a 226 Mg ha –1 reduc-
tion in total above-ground stand biomass in Yap, or >52 % loss 
of what was standing before Typhon Sudal hit (Kauffman and 
Cole, 2010). Tropical cyclones do not affect Yap very often, so 
there was a lot of biomass available to be lost from a single 
event. Mangroves in Panama were noted to attain twice as 
much biomass as the mangroves of south Florida and Puerto 
Rico, which are affected by tropical cyclones more frequently 
(approx. 50 per century for Puerto Rico if cyclones of all inten-
sities are tallied: Lugo, 2000). Cyclones can also pose a risk to 
commercial mangrove forestry operations in regions with high 
tropical cyclone frequencies. For example, Typhoon Chan-hom 
Location Cyclone name Category Maximum sustained 
windspeed, km h–1
Location* Species† Mortality, %‡ Reference
    Maliwaliw, Salcedo RHAP, RHST 73  
    Batang, Hernani SOAL, AEFL, A VMA 86  
    Abejao, Salcedo SOAL, RHAP, LULI 0  
    Bagonbaua, Guiuan SOAL, AEFL, RHST 72  
Save River Delta, 
Mozambique
Eline§ 3–4 168–212 Creek forests A VMA, RHMU, CETA, 
SOAL, BRGY , XYGR
3–29 Macamo et al. (2016)
    Seaward forests A VMA, RHMU, CETA, 
XYGR
21–100  
*Location refers to specific distinctions made by the authors of the manuscript. Please consult the original article for details.
†AECO, Aegiceras corniculatum; AEFL, Aegiceras floridum; A VGE, Avicennia germinans; A VMA, Avicennia marina; BRGY , Bruguiera gymnorrhiza; CETA, Ceriops tagal; LARA, Laguncularia 
racemosa; LULI, Lumnitzera littorea; RHAP, Rhizophora apiculata; RHMA, Rhizophora mangle; RHMU, Rhizophora mucronata, RHST, Rhizophora stylosa; SOAL, Sonneratia alba; XYGR, Xylocarpus 
granatum.
‡When the percentage mortality was unreported, reductions in stem densities were used for its estimation.
§Other cyclones also impacted this study area, including Japhet in 2003 (157 km h–1) and Favio in 2007 (222 km h–1), but Eline caused the most damage in 2000.
Table 2. Continued
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
220
reduced above-ground biomass of mangroves growing in 11- 
and 18-year-old plantations in the Philippines by 70–79 % 
(Salmo et  al., 2014). Commercial forestry operations often 
produce mangrove forests with more uniform canopies, which 
could theoretically reduce wind influences from lower intensity 
cyclones through this type of stand management.
Litter and woody debris fall
Annual litterfall of leaf, twig and reproductive debris in man-
grove forests ranges globally from 1.3 to 27.6 Mg ha
–1 year–1 
(Saenger and Snedaker, 1993; Krauss et  al., 2014), the full 
balance of which can be deposited on the forest floor from any 
single tropical cyclone event in less than a few hours. Adame 
et  al. (2013) even suggested that, with all else being equal, 
mangrove stands with moderate frequency of tropical cyclone 
effects develop higher rates of litterfall production over time 
vs. stands unaffected or heavily affected by cyclones. Litter and 
coarse woody debris stores can be high after a cyclone and, par-
ticularly in the case of woody debris, can persist for decades. 
Ten years after Hurricane Andrew, woody debris volume on the 
mangrove forest floor still ranged from 20 to 181 m
3 ha –1 in 
south Florida (Krauss et al., 2005). Fine woody debris (<7.5 cm 
diameter) represented approx. 36 % of that total woody debris 
volume, which would have been deposited in the years after the 
cyclone. These woody debris volumes equate to a biomass of 
approx. 23.8 Mg ha
–1. In comparison, woody debris biomass 
ranged from 9.5 to 33.9 Mg ha–1, respectively, in an Australian 
mangrove forest without major disturbance (Robertson and 
Daniel, 1989) and a Micronesian mangrove forest undergoing 
heavy harvesting pressure (Allen et al., 2000).
The ecological role of litter and woody debris after a tropical 
cyclone has not been systematically assessed in mangrove for -
ests. On the one hand, woody debris movement during a cyc-
lone can cause physical damage to seedlings, saplings and trees. 
However, on the other hand, woody debris decomposes more 
slowly than leaf litter, suggesting a role in modulated delivery 
of nutrients to forests as woody debris decomposition ensues 
over time (Harmon and Hua, 1991). Different stores decompose 
at different rates, and all of these components would release 
nutrients akin to slow-release fertilizers. Leaves on the man-
grove forest floor decompose the fastest (0.57 ± 0.08 % d
–1) fol-
lowed by wood (0.10 ± 0.02 % d– 1), and both of these sources 
of nutrients and mineralized carbon are augmented by root de-
composition (0.15 ± 0.02 % d
–1) (averages from Middleton and 
McKee, 2001; Romero et al., 2005; Poret et al., 2007), which 
would mineralize nutrients from below-ground as their sup-
porting stems and canopies are also killed and soils become 
compacted (Lang’at et al., 2014). Woody debris further serves a 
role in erosion control, soil pedogenesis, nursery beds for seeds 
and propagules, structure to trap propagules in large quantities 
near debris stores, and habitat for heterotrophic communities 
(Harmon et al., 1986; Allen et al., 2000; Pinzón et al., 2003).
Spatial distribution of effects
When reporting structural effects on mangrove forests, max-
imum sustained winds and duration of sustainment from 
tropical cyclones are not always available for specific forests, 
which might be many kilometres from the nearest weather sta-
tion. This is a major limitation as these are important details 
(Lugo et al., 1983) and, where available, would help to describe 
specific cyclonic influences on the spatial distribution of forest 
injury. The strongest sustained winds are typically registered 
in a cyclone’s eyewall (Jordan et  al., 1960), although, in the 
northern hemisphere, effects can sometimes be most severe in 
the storm’s right quadrant (Shea and Gray, 1973), spawned by 
a higher probability of unpredictable wind downbursts and tor-
nadoes in eyewall and immediate right quadrat areas (Novlan 
and Gray, 1974). Note that the right quadrant in the northern 
hemisphere corresponds to a left quadrant in the southern 
hemisphere due to hemispheric differences in cyclone rotation. 
During Hurricane Andrew in south Florida, the direction of 
mangrove tree fall corresponded very nicely to model-projected 
tropical cyclone wind directions from all except one location 
(0.26 < r
2 < 0.75); plots located in right quadrat areas imme-
diately fringing the Gulf of Mexico had substantially lower 
correlations perhaps because of tornadic activity (r
2  =  0.05) 
(Doyle et al., 2009). Aerial transects revealed greater storm ef-
fects along the fringe than from an inland transect, related to 
greater structural development of mangroves along the fringe, 
with the majority of those trees being felled by the forewinds 
of Hurricane Andrew (Doyle et al., 2009). For subsequent trop-
ical cyclones in south Florida, spatially consistent wind damage 
was most evident among trees over 4 m tall and nearest the 
coast (Zhang et al., 2016).
Shielding of cyclone winds can occur. For example, man-
groves located on the leeward side of Yap were shielded from 
Typhoon Sudal’s major effect relative to windward stands 
(Kauffman and Cole, 2010), while tree mortality and major 
pulses of sedimentation were reduced through wind shielding 
on Roatan, Honduras, during Hurricane Mitch (Cahoon et al., 
2003). However, the 3-D structure of mountains can cause 
wind vortices and vertical sheer that contribute to wind-related 
injury. Although this type of effect may be more common in 
upland forests (e.g. Lugo et al., 1983), even there, aspect and 
exposure were not strong predictors of forest response among 
Caribbean hurricanes (Brokaw and Walker, 1991). Windward 
slopes were, however, typically more affected than leeward 
slopes, but it is uncertain how this would relate uniformly to 
mangroves developing on flat intertidal planes corresponding 
to those slopes.
In addition to slope and aspect, mangrove trees developing 
in canopy gaps tended to be less affected than trees posi-
tioned in the canopy during Hurricane Andrew (Smith et al., 
1994). This related to average tree size in that trees in gaps 
were smaller. Such gaps have also been shown to contribute 
to spatial variability in structure and diversity in upland trop-
ical forests (Brokaw and Grear, 1991; Vandermeer et al., 2000). 
Considering that many mangrove forests within the Caribbean 
and other parts of the world have a number of lightning gaps 
in some stage of recovery (Whelan, 2005; Amir, 2012), gaps 
would provide significant legacies that contribute to resulting 
spatial structure of mangrove forests after a tropical cyclone.
The spatial signature of mangrove forest effects from trop-
ical cyclones may be less when viewed across the landscape 
vs. through the lens of individual plots. Dutta et  al. (2015) 
described the spatial effects of three tropical cyclones on 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
221
a series of mangrove islands in the Sundarbans of India and 
Bangladesh from 2007 to 2009. Cyclones SIDR (windspeeds 
of 46–212 km h
–1), Rechmi (windspeeds of 46–83 km h –1) and 
Aila (windspeeds of 37–111 km h –1) all created major struc-
tural change in very small areas of the mangrove forest, but, 
overall, these tropical cyclones affected the majority of the 
forest with <10 % effects (Fig. 3). Individual plots would have 
revealed greater structural effects (>60 %) in some locations, 
but, overall, visible effects were moderate and varied spatially 
by cyclone trajectory and size (Dutta et al., 2015). Among the 
approx. 8568 ha of mangrove area affected by Typhoon Haiyan 
in the Philippines as it made landfall with windspeeds >252 km 
h
–1 (Long et al., 2016), 870 ha were initially severely affected 
(i.e. trees uprooted and broken, or complete defoliation), 1820 
ha were moderately affected (i.e. broken branches, partially 
broken tree trunks still standing but defoliated) and 5900 ha 
were minimally affected (i.e. mostly intact with minor defoli-
ation). These damage areas were reduced significantly within 
18 months of the initial post-cyclone assessment from recovery 
(Long et al., 2016).
 Hurricane Vance, the strongest storm ever to affect the 
Australian mainland, removed 5700 ha of the 12 800 ha of man-
groves in one region, but within 6 years 68 % of the affected 
area was recovering (Paling et  al., 2008). Finally, 47.8 % of 
the mangrove forests of Mozambique were affected by Cyclone 
Eline across a spatial landscape, but mangroves dominated by 
Rhizophora mucronata along the seaward fringes experienced 
upwards of 100 % mortality, while those forests of different 
species located along tidal creeks were often intact and re-
covering (Macamo et  al., 2016). Therefore, the development 
of mangroves along different ecogeomorphic settings (sensu 
Lugo and Snedaker, 1974) seems to have a role in tropical cyc-
lone resilience to wind energy, making it even more difficult 
to develop surveys that isolate the spatial effects of singular 
cyclone events on spatially diffuse mangrove forests. Tropical 
cyclones are often more frequent along some coasts (Fig. 1). 
Typhoon Eline caused the most effects in Mozambique, but two 
subsequent cyclones contributed to additional effects (Typhoon 
Japhet in 2003 and Typhoon Favio in 2007) and, collectively, 
the effects from these tropical cyclones are difficult to separate 
(Macamo et  al., 2016). Other cases of frequent effects from 
tropical cyclones include, but are not limited to, the greater 
Caribbean region (including Florida), parts of Central America, 
the Philippines and the Northern Marianas Islands.
Biogeochemical effects
The biogeochemical effects of tropical cyclones on mangrove 
forests are diverse and often context dependent. In some cases, 
tropical cyclones can improve abiotic conditions, increase nu-
trient availability and stimulate biotic productivity (Lovelock 
et  al., 2011). However, in extreme cases, tropical cyclones 
can lead to forest mortality, rapid carbon losses and, while un-
common, the conversion of mangrove forests to an entirely dif-
ferent ecosystem (Wanless and Vlaswinkel, 2005; Smith et al., 
2009). Positive biotic effects of cyclones are most pronounced 
in hypersaline and/or nutrient-poor environments, where the 
freshwater and nutrient subsidies provided by tropical cyclones 
have the potential to alleviate physiological stress and stimulate 
productivity. For example, in an arid, hypersaline mangrove 
forest in north-western Australia, Cyclone Pancho increased 
nutrient availability and enhanced plant growth (Lovelock 
et al., 2011). Similarly, in the oligotrophic, phosphorus-limited 
Florida Everglades (USA), phosphorus-rich storm sediments 
transported by tropical cyclones can increase forest product-
ivity (Chen and Twilley, 1999; Davis et al., 2004; Castañeda-
Moya et al., 2010). Karstic-mangrove ecosystems, like those in 
the Everglades and the Yucatan Peninsula (Mexico) that have 
developed on calcareous substrates without large terrigenous 
sediment inputs, are often phosphorus limited (Rovai et  al., 
2018; Twilley et al., 2018); hence, storm-derived, phosphorus-
rich sediments can trigger comparatively large biotic responses 
in these nutrient-limited systems (Rivera-Monroy et al., 2011; 
Adame et  al., 2013). In contrast, the nutrient-enrichment ef-
fects of storm sediments are expected to be less pronounced in 
mangrove forests that have developed in deltas and other sedi-
ment- and nutrient-rich environments. Although storm-derived 
sediment additions are often beneficial, too much sediment has 
the potential to bury aerial roots and limit oxygen exchange, 
which, in extreme cases, can lead to anoxia and forest mor -
tality (Ellison, 1998; Paling et  al., 2008). Tropical cyclone 
floodwaters that are impounded and retained by anthropo-
genic barriers or cyclone-transported sediments can also pro-
duce anaerobic conditions, high sulfide concentrations and/
or hypersaline soils, which may lead to forest stress and mor -
tality if the flooding persists or natural tidal connectivity is 
hindered for an extended period (i.e. months or years) (Lewis 
et  al., 2016). In an arid mangrove system in Baja California 
(Mexico), a tropical cyclone-transported sand dune hindered 
tidal exchange and resulted in mangrove degradation; hydro-
logical restoration was subsequently used to restore tidal con-
nectivity and improve abiotic conditions for mangrove recovery 
(Bashan et al., 2013).
Tropical cyclone effects on carbon cycling in mangrove 
forests are largely understudied. In the most extreme cases, 
carbon may be permanently lost and exported from the system 
if mangrove peat collapses following forest mortality (Cahoon 
et al., 2003; Wanless and Vlaswinkel, 2005; Smith et al., 2009). 
Wind-induced leaf defoliation and loss of vegetation struc-
ture can result in temporary losses of above-ground carbon, 
due to reductions in above-ground biomass and productivity; 
however, these short-term carbon losses are often followed by 
periods of rapid carbon gains during forest regeneration and re-
covery (Odum, 1969; Barr et al., 2012; Danielson et al., 2017; 
Kominoski et  al., 2018). The tree heights and above-ground 
carbon stocks of mangrove forests in cyclone-free regions are 
often much larger than their counterparts along coasts that are 
affected by frequent tropical cyclones (Simard et al., 2019), but 
we expect that the below-ground carbon stocks and soil burial 
rates in cyclone-active regions vs. cyclone-free regions would 
be more difficult to generalize.
MECHANISMS OF EFFECT
Structural effects on individual mangrove trees during trop-
ical cyclones occur in three ways: (1) stems are broken; (2) 
trees are knocked over (tip-ups); or (3) trees remain standing 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
222
but are whipped by the wind and sustain internal structural in-
juries and/or are defoliated. The first two categories are often 
considered together in post-cyclone effect surveys, as both are 
often, but not always, lethal. Some insight into the distribution 
of each category from a major tropical cyclone event in south 
Florida can be inferred from McCoy et  al. (1996), who sep-
arated effects according to uprooted vs. broken stems. Across 
three mangrove species, 49–81 % of the trees were uprooted or 
India
Bangladesh
Sundarbans
mangrove area
A
B
C
N
Cyclone SIDR
(2007),
46–212 km h–1
Cyclone Reshmi
(2008),
46–83 km h–1
% Area disturbed
<10
10–20
20–30
30–40
40–50
50–60
60–80
>80
Cyclone path
Cyclone Aila
(2009),
37–111 km h
–1
Fig. 3. Spatial distribution of damage (%  area disturbed) caused by three separate tropical cyclones (SIDR, Reshmi and Aila) affecting the Sundarbans man-
grove forest of India and Bangladesh from 2007 to 2009. Approximate tropical cyclone storm tracks are depicted by red-dashed arrows. The figure modified is 
from Dutta et al. (2015). Reprinted by permission from Springer Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH: Natural Hazards [Assessment of ecological disturbance 
in the mangrove forest of Sundarbans caused by cyclones using MODIS time-series data (2001–2011)], D. Dutta, 2015.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
223
broken, with 43–62 % of those trees being uprooted. A few of 
the trees with broken stems appeared to be still in good con-
dition; however, most were judged to be dead or in poor con-
dition (McCoy et al., 1996). Roth (1992) reported that 37, 53 
and 56 % of A. germinans, L. racemosa and R. mangle trees, 
respectively, were broken from Hurricane Joan in Nicaragua. 
Indeed, certain species do tend to have more wind-resistant 
structural characteristics as rated in survival terms. The man-
grove species Ceriops tagal, Rhizophora stylosa, Bruguiera 
parviflora and Excoecaria agallocha were very susceptible 
to windthrow in Australia, while Xylocarpus moluccensis, 
Aegiceras corniculatum, Aegialitis annulata and Lumnitzera 
racemosa were not (Stocker, 1976).
Ecophysiology of individual trees
What characteristics of individual mangrove trees dictate rela-
tive susceptibility to tropical cyclone winds, or is this left more 
to chance? In a review, Saenger (2002) suggested that trees sus-
ceptible to windthrow are likely to be those with weakly devel-
oped cable root systems, or those with structures weakened by 
erosion, slumping or biological agents. Aerial root structures 
have long been hypothesized to provide storm resilience to for-
ested wetland trees (Lamborn, 1890), and aerial root structures 
are diverse and abundant in mangroves (Tomlinson, 2016).
Crown alteration is the most common type of tropical cyc-
lone effect described globally, as the morphological structure of 
many mangrove leaves (i.e. thick and large) often catch the wind 
and are ripped off trees (Saenger, 2002). Even during cyclones 
with lower wind velocities, substantial crown alteration can 
occur. For example, broken branches and twisted stems were 
found in 33–71 % of mangrove trees occurring in the Indian 
River Lagoon, Florida, from a combination of Hurricanes 
Frances (Category 2)  and Jeanne (Category 3)  (V ogt et  al., 
2012). In order to ensure survival of the tree, the canopy must 
quickly re-grow leaves. A characteristic of Avicennia following 
a tropical cyclone is prolific stem re-sprouting on decurrently 
growing primary branches that once supported dominant 
crowns, perhaps serving as a mechanism to quickly re-establish 
photosynthesis and assist the tree with further structural repairs. 
Yet, we must keep in mind that in instances where all of the 
crown is lost, mortality can sometimes occur even in trees with 
the capacity for secondary lateral bud formation.
New growth from stems must be supported by at least a par-
tially intact vascular structure (xylem) within the stem, and 
winds can affect the internal anatomical structuring (e.g. induce 
embolism) of mangrove trees to the point of mortality. Some 
mangrove trees show recovery of part of their canopy only, po-
tentially related to the parts still supported by an intact vascular 
structure through the stem in the months following a tropical 
cyclone. Furthermore, individual branches and trees continue 
to die long after a cyclone hits, especially among those trees 
that are uprooted (Walker, 1995). Sherman et  al. (2001) dis-
covered that 6–9 % of the mangrove trees recorded to be alive 
7 months after Hurricane Georges in the Dominican Republic 
were dead by 18 months. Additional mortality and morbidity 
occur from a combination of defoliation stress, reduction or al-
teration of vascular structures and limited carbohydrate stores, 
which are sometimes exacerbated by greater soil anaerobiosis 
from prolonged flooding or sediment smothering post-cyclone. 
Steinke and Ward (1989) even discovered that physical stress 
of flooding from two cyclones contributed to the loss of a 75 
m shoreline fringe of Avicennia marina, with larger trees being 
directly killed through scour along with the injury from wind. 
Prolonged flooding sufficient to result in barnacle growth on 
some mangroves after the cyclone also contributed to delayed 
mortality from altered soil conditions (greater anaerobiosis). 
Certainly, natural and human-sourced debris from flooding and 
storm surge routinely affect or injure mangrove stands and are 
especially prone to killing seedlings and saplings (Table 1).
The structure of the mangrove stand itself can dissipate trop-
ical cyclone winds. Laguncularia racemosa stems experienced 
uncharacteristically greater survival during a tropical cyc-
lone in the Dominican Republic because of the occurrence of 
L. racemosa within a uniform canopy (Sherman et al., 2001). 
While the stand provides structural protection, individual 
L. racemosa trees in these stands may also have had a higher 
stem length to diameter ratio characteristic of many forest 
plantations; this ratio is suspected in reducing sway frequency 
during high winds (Sellier and Fourcaud, 2009). Thus, the 
structure of the mangrove stand can influence individual tree 
characteristics and survival during a tropical cyclone. Many 
naturally seeded mangrove forests over a certain height (>5 
m), however, have uneven structural characteristics composed 
of emergent trees potentially more susceptible to initial trop-
ical cyclone winds. While we know very little about patterns 
of anatomical injury to individual mangrove trees during wind 
events, studies from other forest types have indicated that ma-
terial properties of wood (e.g. modulus of elasticity) can have 
only a limited influence on wind resistance; rather, small dif-
ferences in individual tree morphology can cause extreme vari-
ation in stem oscillations during wind events that compound 
structural failures in various ways (Sellier and Fourcaud, 2009). 
Whether a mangrove tips-up or is broken may also be related to 
these small anatomical variations, position in a stand and sub-
strate, and perhaps less on wood density per se. In firm soils in 
upland forests (Peltola et al., 2000), wind effects occurred more 
often from stem breakage vs. tip-ups, such as when soils were 
looser (Coutts, 1986). Mangrove soils are often wet, but soils 
around mangrove trees can be very firm, providing structural 
support to mangroves far beyond storm resilience (e.g. McKee 
et al., 2007). Appreciable soil strength may also contribute in 
some way to the percentages of broken vs. tipped-up mangrove 
trees. Crown characteristics also play a role. Trees with larger 
crowns and leaves that are more resistant to breakage at the 
petiole cause greater mechanical stress to stems during wind 
events (Sellier and Fourcaud, 2009).
Ecophysiology of mangrove stands
Mangrove canopies that do survive a tropical cyclone would 
be expected to encounter different environmental conditions 
after the storm as sunlight, heat and humidity are also altered. 
Hurricane Wilma, which passed through the mangrove forests 
of Everglades National Park in October of 2005 with max-
imum sustained winds of 176–190 km h
–1, caused complete 
defoliation of the upper canopy comprised of A.  germinans, 
L.  racemosa and R.  mangle surrounding an established eddy 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
224
covariance tower. After the cyclone, soil temperatures down to 
50 cm into the soil increased, variability in air temperature in-
creased with higher peak temperatures and greater transport of 
water vapour from soil to the upper canopy drove latent heat 
flux increases and sensible heat flux decreases post-cyclone 
(Barr et al., 2012). These conditions continued through at least 
2009 (i.e. 4 years). Residual mangrove canopy trees would not 
only have to sustain and overcome structural reduction and in-
jury incurred during the tropical cyclone, but would also have 
to survive a new transpirational diffusion gradient imposed by 
higher vapour pressure deficits to the canopy. This could press 
the need for greater stomatal control over canopy water losses.
Recall that the primary driver of water use in forests is the va-
pour pressure diffusion gradient between the canopy and atmos-
phere, and, as water is transpired from leaves, pressure builds 
in stem xylem, which prompts a greater need for water extrac-
tion through the stem and from the roots (Cohesion–Tension 
Theory; Dixon and Joly, 1894). Mangrove stands almost uni-
versally have two primary characteristics that allow them to 
survive these higher vapour pressure deficits after a cyclone: 
(1) mangroves have strong stomatal control of transpirational 
water losses (Clough and Sim, 1989); and (2) mangroves have 
very high rates of water use efficiency, meaning that they need 
to use very little water to support photosynthesis (Farquhar 
et al., 1982; Reef and Lovelock, 2015), a characteristic being 
realized among mangroves at the leaf, stem and stand level 
(Lovelock et al., 2016). Despite lower total water use of man-
grove stands from structural losses after Hurricane Wilma 
(O’Halloran et al., 2012), surviving mangrove trees might have 
still been pressed to use more water because of higher vapour 
pressure deficits in the months following the cyclone as many 
of the surrounding trees were broken or blown over. Therefore, 
residual trees may have to deal with additional desalination 
and less efficient use of water. For example, after Hurricane 
Wilma, sap flow from the outer sapwood (1.5–2.0 cm) of indi-
vidual R. mangle, A. germinans and L. racemosa trees averaged 
68–179 % higher in surviving trees of broken canopies vs. these 
same species growing in intact canopies a distance away (cf. 
Krauss et al., 2015) (Fig. 4), perhaps at least partly reflecting a 
greater physiological demand for water loss and stomatal regu-
lation from persistently high vapour pressure deficits or en-
hanced nutrient conditions post-cyclone.
Tropical cyclones impose changes to the net ecosystem ex-
change of CO
2 and radiative forcing from mangrove forests in 
line with what has been documented from other forest disturb-
ances (Amiro et al., 2010). Injury to the mangrove canopy from 
Hurricane Wilma caused a significant decrease in overall photo-
synthesis, an increase in respiration and a reduced albedo from 
the underlying dark peat-based soils, altering radiative forcing 
over the years following the tropical cyclone (O’Halloran et al., 
2012). This is not necessarily what happens in other forests as 
lighter understorey soils are exposed after passage of a cyclone 
to increase albedo. Tropical cyclone influences on mangrove 
air and soil temperatures are not consistent though. Among six 
tropical cyclones to influence mangroves in China, air and soil 
temperatures were not reduced after the storm, and in only one 
stand was evapotranspiration higher after the cyclone (Typhoon 
Megi). All other tropical cyclones imposed relative, though not 
significant, decreases in evapotranspiration after the cyclone 
(Chen et al., 2014). While these study sites from China sug-
gest caution when interpreting atmospheric change and stress 
to the residual canopy in mangroves post-cyclone, both stands 
assessed in China were located lower in the boundary layer, 
with canopy heights of 3–4 m, than sites in Everglades National 
Park, with canopy height averaging 19 m.  The climate zone 
along with underlying soil type, state of forest succession and 
site index no doubt matter to this assessment (O’Halloran et al., 
2012; Chen et al., 2014).
R. mangle
L. racemosa
A. germinans
R. mangle
L. racemosa
A. germinans
01 02 03 04 05 0
No
cyclone
Post-
cyclone
A
B
Sap flow (maximum daily; g H2O m–2 s–1)
60
Fig. 4. Box plots with maximum daily individual tree sap flow rates as measured from the outer sapwood of three Neotropical mangrove tree 
species in Florida, USA. Plot (A) shows relatively high sap flow rates in June and July from individual trees left standing approx. 21  months 
after Hurricane Wilma damaged mangroves along the Shark River in Everglades National Park on 24 October 2005 (n = 2–3 trees per species; 16 d), and plot 
(B) shows lower sap flow rates from the same mangrove species in May and June of a previous year (2003) within an intact, undamaged canopy at Rookery Bay 
National Estuarine Reserve, Florida (n = 15–18 trees per species; 49 d). U.S. Geological Survey data (V . Engel and K. W. Krauss; after Krauss et al., 2015).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
225
Regeneration systems
Recovery of mangroves after a tropical cyclone by various means 
is often assured; however, challenges exist. For example, tree 
mortality from repetitive cyclone strikes can lead to rapid de-
composition and compaction of peats, or ‘collapse’ (Snedaker, 
1995; Lang’at et al., 2014), and the increased standing water 
levels that result may stymie regeneration (Sherman et  al., 
2000; Cahoon et al., 2003). One obvious mechanism to over -
come this (and previously covered) involves the ability of cer -
tain mangrove trees to re-sprout either from coppiced stems 
or from lateral stem sprouts of trees felled by cyclonic winds 
(Snedaker, 2002). However, data on the percentage of mangrove 
trees coppicing or re-sprouting after individual storms and their 
subsequent contribution to the regenerating forest are difficult 
to find, perhaps because coppicing or re-sprouting can take 
time and most post-cyclone assessments occur within 2 years 
of the event. Sherman et al. (2001) did report that most of the 
L. racemosa seedlings present 7 months after a tropical cyclone 
in the Dominican Republic were from basal sprouts, but there 
were very few A. germinans sprouts to be found at that point in 
time. Also, profuse re-sprouting from dormant epicormic buds 
was recorded for L. racemosa and A. germinans after Hurricane 
Andrew in south Florida (Baldwin et al., 1995), but differenti-
ation between sprout and seedling in-growth to the sapling or 
young tree stage was not made (Baldwin et al., 2001).
Surge and high tides can serve to buffer and protect seedlings 
and saplings from wind effects during tropical cyclones. When 
Cyclone Tracy affected the mangrove forests around Darwin, 
Australia in 1974, forests were on a rising tide, leaving most 
saplings and small trees covered in water and unaffected by 
winds (Stocker, 1976). Ferwerda et  al. (2007) suggested that 
flooding of the regeneration pool contributed significantly to a 
near-complete recovery of the mangrove forest within 10 years 
of Cyclone Tracy. Short-statured mangroves in Exmouth Gulf 
may have also been spared some wind and wave effects by 
being inundated up to one half of the average canopy height 
during Cyclone Vance (Paling et al., 2008).
Many post-cyclone surveys provide counts of seedlings from 
two primary seedling-based regeneration systems inherent to 
mangroves. The first seedling-based regeneration system in-
cludes all of the seedlings or saplings that are rooted in the 
understorey before a tropical cyclone event. This is referred to 
as advance regeneration (Helms, 1998). Advance regeneration 
provides an opportunity for seedlings or saplings surviving in 
the understorey on seed or hypocotyl reserves, sparse side or 
overhead light, or sunflecks to grow into the mid-storey and 
eventually replace the mangrove forest that was blown over. 
While the concept of shade tolerance in mangroves has been 
questioned (Snedaker and Lahmann, 1988), it is clear that man-
grove seedlings and, in some cases, saplings can survive in the 
understorey for a period of time overlapping cyclonic activity. 
Because mangrove seedlings and saplings must also balance 
salinity tolerance, high light levels are eventually required for 
growth and development in most mangroves (Lugo, 1986). For 
example, seedling survival in A. germinans was higher at low 
salinity, and increased light levels promoted greater survival 
under high vs. low salinity in a Venezuelan mangrove forest 
(López-Hoffman et  al., 2007). Mangrove seedlings benefit 
from higher light levels almost universally and would be stifled 
long term in the understorey (Krauss et al., 2008).
Paradoxically, seedlings surviving in the understorey after a 
tropical cyclone would have to adjust to new and more intense 
light levels once the overstorey is partially or completely re-
moved. This is a common issue in tropical forests as seedlings 
present in newly formed gaps or larger canopy openings must 
tolerate photosynthetic light induction and altered cellular me-
tabolism as light levels increase acutely (Press et  al., 1996). 
Avoiding photoinhibition in high irradiance, saline environ-
ments is enabled through inherently low stomatal conductance, 
high photosynthetic water use efficiencies and low light-
saturated rates of photosynthesis at the leaf level in order to 
protect photosystem II proteins, all of which are characteristics 
of mangroves (Farquhar et al., 1982; Ball and Farquhar, 1984). 
Thus, photoinhibition is rarely noted in mangroves (Cheeseman, 
1991); however, mangrove leaves developing in shaded en-
vironments often have high quantum yields (Björkman et al., 
1998; Krauss and Allen, 2003), which may indicate that such 
leaves would not be optimally designed for the higher light en-
vironments encountered immediately after a tropical cyclone 
removes overstorey shading.
The second seedling-based regeneration system includes dis-
persal of seeds and propagules to understorey locations within 
cyclone-affected mangroves, which can continue for months to 
years after a tropical cyclone. Roth (1992) even suggested that 
the production of propagules in some Caribbean mangrove spe-
cies might coincide by design with higher hurricane frequen-
cies in August through October, thus recognizing the potential 
evolutionary importance of dispersing mangrove propagules 
to post-cyclone recovery. Furthermore, dispersal of propa-
gules can occur over considerable distances as some mangrove 
propagules can float for many months and remain viable. For 
example, propagules of R.  apiculata and R.  mucronata from 
Micronesia floated for up to 3 and 5  months, respectively 
(Drexler, 2001), and propagules of B.  sexangula from intro-
duced populations in Hawaii floated for >2  months (Allen 
and Krauss, 2006). Propagules of R. mangle, L. racemosa and 
Pelliciera rhizophorae floated for >100, 31 and 6 d, respect-
ively, in experiments conducted in Panama (Rabinowitz, 1978), 
and, among 13 species of Australian mangroves subjected to 
flotation trials, most floated for >15 d (Clarke et  al., 2001). 
Indeed, some mangroves exhibit a greater capacity for dis-
persal than is realized in nature, e.g. the majority of Ceriops 
tagal propagules in northern Australia did not disperse >3 m 
from parent trees (McGuinness, 1996), despite the potential of 
having >80 % of propagules floating beyond 15 d (Clarke et al., 
2001). Thus, much of the seed and propagule base might also 
be very locally sourced after a tropical cyclone.
As a result of these two regeneration systems, regeneration 
of mangrove forest trees can be high after a tropical cyclone, 
and proceed rapidly in some cases (Ferwerda et  al., 2007). 
Some 17 months after Hurricane Joan affected mangrove for -
ests in Nicaragua, 0.68–1.82 seedlings m
–2 (6800–18 200 seed-
lings ha–1) were established and represented all four mangrove 
species present there even though seedlings had to contend 
with shading from the mangrove-associated fern, Acrostichum  
sp. (Roth, 1992). A  general theme among post-cyclone sur -
veys in mangrove forests is variability in recovery (Stoddart, 
1969), which might not always be predictable across an af-
fected landscape. For example, in south Florida, mixed-species 
mangrove forests in Everglades City regenerated more heavily 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
226
with A.  germinans vs. its pre-hurricane distribution, but 
Broad River mangrove forests regenerated more heavily with 
R.  mangle and L.  racemosa approx. 9  years after Hurricane 
Andrew affected south Florida (Fig. 5A, C). As further con-
trast, mixed-species mangrove forests along the Lostmans 
River regenerated with more equal representation among all 
three species (Fig. 5B); all three sites sustained large amounts 
of visible effects because of their location in the eyewall and 
right quadrats of tropical cyclone circulation (Doyle et  al., 
1995). On two fringe mangrove forests in south Florida also af-
fected by Hurricane Andrew, much of the regeneration pool for 
R. mangle was present before the cyclone, while densities of 
L. racemosa seedlings increased exponentially for 7 years after 
the cyclone (Baldwin et al., 2001). Over this same period, re-
generation of A. germinans increased on one site, but not on the 
other. In-growth to the sapling stage was prolific but variable 
by species on each site, with sapling heights increasing con-
siderably between 1995 and 1999 (or 3–7 years after the trop-
ical cyclone). Baldwin et al. (2001) concluded that moderate 
tropical cyclone effects on fringe mangrove forests tended to 
promote release via advance regeneration of R. mangle seed-
lings, while heavy effects necessitate more reliance on seed-
ling recruitment, which may lead to mixed-species stands 
upon full recovery of these fringe mangrove forests (Baldwin 
et al., 2001). Likewise, mangrove forests assigned as coastal 
fringe and interior fringe in south-eastern Florida were dom-
inated by R. mangle stems after the same tropical cyclone in 
1992, but both sites differed greatly in seedling numbers at 
specific heights by 2001 (Ross et al., 2006). Piou et al. (2006), 
who assessed the recovery of mangrove forests in Belize some 
41  years after Hurricane Hattie, suggested that early post-
cyclone regeneration trajectories greatly influence the stand 
structure observed well into the future. In some extreme cases, 
mangrove seedlings are completely stripped from the under -
storey during tropical cyclones. For example, fringing man-
grove forests within one study block were denuded of seedlings 
(≤40  cm tall) from Cyclone Eline in Mozambique (Macamo 
et al., 2016). Likewise, Cyclone Vance took a massive toll on 
A. marina forests of north-western Australia in 1999, with the 
majority of initial post-cyclone regeneration being dominated 
by R. stylosa in lieu of A. marina (Paling et al., 2008).
A large threat to post-cyclone recovery for mangroves glo-
bally is hydrological modifications incurred before a tropical 
cyclone event, which can often limit or altogether prevent ad-
vance regeneration or successful seeding after a storm because 
of improper hydrodynamic conditions established before the 
cyclone (Lewis et  al., 2016). For example, a greater number 
of seedlings were recruited in a tidally unrestricted (69.4 % 
change in seedling density) vs. tidally restricted (31.2 % change 
in seedling density) impoundment over a 2  year period fol-
lowing Hurricane Charley on Sanibel Island, Florida (Harris 
et al., 2010).
SURGE SUPPRESSION AND COASTAL PROTECTION
Identifying the role of mangroves in surge suppression and 
damage abatement to anthropogenic structures is part of the 
underlying theme of coastal protection (Gedan et al., 2011; Lee 
et al., 2014); surge can also affect those protective forests, as 
has been documented during past tropical cyclone and major 
tsunami events (Smith et al., 1994; Kamthonkiat et al., 2011). 
On the other hand, mangrove forests along estuarine fringes 
that are flooded by surge from approaching tropical cyclones 
are afforded some protection from wind (Smith et al., 1994), 
perhaps even lessening the suppression role of mangroves as 
waters overtop small stands. Indeed, assigning a role to vege-
tation in suppression and identifying suppression rates use 
two very different approaches. The first set of evidence in-
cludes a series of empirical assessments from actual tropical 
cyclone events, whereby water level recorders are present in 
a cyclone’s path. These are uncommon, and the first of these 
assessments probably did not include many mangroves; how-
ever, beach ridges and any marsh-dwelling scrub species would 
have contributed to an estimated storm surge suppression rate 
of approx. 6.9 cm km
–1 (i.e. centimetres of surge suppression 
per linear kilometre of wetland) through the coastal wetlands of 
Louisiana along the northern US Gulf Coast (House Document, 
1965). Additional published rates of surge suppression from 
a range of other coastal wetland types, including some that 
merely re-state previous sources, expand suppression to 4.2–
18.9 cm km
–1 (Krauss et al., 2009), with very few observation 
points aligned to evaluate specific habitat types. In contrast, 
water level recorders were positioned just right for two trop-
ical cyclone events affecting south Florida mangrove forests in 
2004 (Hurricane Charley) and 2005 (Hurricane Wilma). One 
series of recorders was aligned inside mangrove forests along 
the Shark River, recording surge suppression of 4.2 cm km
–1, 
while the other series of recorders was aligned within interior 
mangrove forests not associated with a river, recording greater 
surge suppression of 9.5 cm km
–1 (Krauss et al., 2009).
The second set of evidence includes a series of models of both 
theoretical scenarios and actual tropical cyclone events. Three-
dimensional vegetation structure, different plant types (woody 
vs. herbaceous), surge height, surge velocity, coastal geomorph-
ology and storm characteristics (Resio and Westerink, 2008) all 
contribute to surge suppression and can be modelled with some 
degree of accuracy (Mazda et al., 1997a, b; Sheng et al., 2012). 
A meta-analysis using wave attenuation data from four man-
grove and ten marsh environments indicated that wave height 
attenuation was similar in marshes and mangroves, despite the 
more complex vegetation structure in mangroves (Gedan et al., 
2011). Actual measurements of surge suppression from storm 
events assessed over larger distances were universally lower 
than suggested by modelled rates (Gedan et al., 2011), but the 
immediate seaward fringe consistently provided the largest 
surge suppression (Narayan et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2012).
Suppression of waves by mangroves is sensitive to the speed 
of the approaching tropical cyclone; reducing that speed by 
6.7 m s
–1 to 2.2 m s –1 is equivalent to the difference between 
a Category 3 and a Category 5 cyclone in terms of flooding 
(Liu et al., 2013). The faster the storm moves inland the more 
effective mangroves are in attenuating surge. Thus, there are 
a large number of simulation scenarios to consider, so the 
most effective way to handle modelling is to consider actual 
scenarios of coastline geomorphology or characteristics of 
past tropical cyclone events. Mangroves (6–10 m tall) were 
found to decrease cyclone wave heights by 60 % under simu-
lated conditions, suggesting that bands of mangroves just 
300–800 m wide placed in front of surge will greatly reduce 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
227
Everglades City
40
1992 2001
30
20
DBH (cm)
10
0
Lostmans River
Broad River
40
1992 2001
30
20
DBH (cm)
10
0
8
810
Avicennia germinans
Laguncularia racemosa
Rhizophora mangle
6
6
4
4
2
2
0
0
–2
–2
–4
–4
–6 –6
–8–10
–8
–10
40
30
20
DBH (cm)
10
0
12
12
9
9
6
6
3
3
–3 –3
–6 –6
–9 –9
–12 –12
m
m m
50
40
1992 2001
30
20
DBH (cm)
10
0
8
8 10
6
6
4
4
2
2
0
0
–2
–2
–4
–4
–6 –6
–8–10
–8
–10
m m
50
40
30
20
DBH (cm)
10
0
8
8 10
6
6
4
4
2
2
0
0
–2
–2
–4
–4
–6 –6
–8–10
–8
–10
m m
8
8 10
6
6
4
4
2
2
0
0
–2
–2
–4
–4
–6 –6
–8–10
–8
–10
m m
m0
0
40
30
20
DBH (cm)
10
0
12
12
9
9
6
6
3
3
–3 –3
–6 –6
–9 –9
–12 –12
m m0
0
A
B
C
Fig. 5. Spatial depiction of individual mangrove tree diameter at breast height (DBH: cm) distributions within 10–13 m radius circular plots 
prior to sustaining damage from Hurricane Andrew (graphs labelled 1992)  and 9 years after sustaining damage from Hurricane Andrew and showing 
regeneration (graphs labeled 2001). Hurricane Andrew barrelled through the Florida Everglades on 24 August 1992, with (A) Everglades City plots oriented to 
the north and outside of the eyewall but within the storm’s right impact quadrat, and (B) Lostmans River and (C) Broad River plots oriented within the northern 
eyewall and central eyewall, respectively, of the storm. U.S. Geological Survey data (T. W. Doyle and T. J. Smith).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
228
damage to built structures (Narayan et al., 2010). Zhang et al. 
(2012), using hindcasts from storm readings, suggested that 
storm surge suppression from Hurricane Wilma could have 
been 20–50 cm km
–1 for bands of mangrove 6–30 km wide. 
Much of the suppression documented by their modelling oc-
curred within the first 3 km of the mangrove band from open 
water inland. Indeed, for the series of recorders aligned during 
Hurricane Charley’s approach to the Ten Thousands Islands 
region of Florida, suppression was highest in the 2.3–3.2 km 
band (15.8  cm km
–1), intermediate in the 3.2–4.5 km band 
(9.4 cm km –1) and lowest in the 4.5–5.5 km band (4.1 cm km–1) 
from the open estuary, with the latter two bands dominated by 
marsh (Krauss et al., 2009).
The specific differences associated with cyclones vs. normal 
waves and tsunamis have created some confusion in modelling. 
Tropical cyclone-generated storm surges act like a high tide 
event fostering a temporary increase in sea level (Lowe et al., 
2001). As that surge moves inland, barometric pressure de-
creases commensurate with the intensity of the tropical cyclone 
to allow for water volume expansion to add to surge intensity, 
and strong winds can create additional ‘normal waves’ super -
imposed on the top of surge to compound effects (Wells, 2012). 
Therefore, it is not appropriate to simply apply a normal wave 
model to surge suppression; energy, wave amplitude, pressure 
and velocity are different (von Storch and Woth, 2008). It is 
uncertain how some of the more notable models of surge waves 
account for this difference (see Baird et al., 2009), or how 3-D 
vegetation structure is accounted for as water levels increase 
to higher vegetation layers during the surge, sensu Sheng et al. 
(2012). For example, using normal wave models, wave height 
is suppressed by 20 % over 100 m of mangrove (Mazda et al., 
1997a) and by 50 % over 150 m of mangrove when simulating 
Rhizophora-style prop roots (Brinkman et al., 1997). This is not 
a reasonable expectation of suppression for tropical cyclone-
generated surge events through mangroves. Likewise, a tsu-
nami creates a different scenario. Despite the publication of 54 
papers on the topic of coastal protection by mangroves between 
1972 and 2005 (Dahdouh-Guebas and Jayatissa, 2009), protec-
tion offered by tropical cyclone surge suppression for specific 
events may still be overstated by modelling (Baird et al., 2009).
SEDIMENTATION, SURFACE ELEV ATION CHANGE 
AND RESPONSES TO SEA-LEVEL RISE
In the face of accelerated-sea level rise, the fate of mangrove 
forests will depend upon their ability to adjust their vertical and 
horizontal position in the landscape via local surface elevation 
change (Krauss et  al., 2014; Woodroffe et  al., 2016) as well 
as via horizontal migration into upslope and/or upriver ecosys-
tems (Enwright et al., 2016; Borchert et al., 2018). The sedi-
mentation and surface elevation changes that are triggered by 
tropical cyclones can affect local, soil surface elevation in posi-
tive and negative ways. Mangrove ecosystems are, in general, 
highly resilient ecosystems that can often tolerate or quickly re-
cover from tropical cyclones, as discussed in previous sections. 
Nevertheless, there are a few examples throughout the Holocene 
where potent tropical cyclones have resulted in mass mangrove 
mortality followed by peat collapse, soil elevation losses and 
conversion to mud flats (Jones et al., 2019). One example of 
cyclone-induced peat collapse comes from the Cape Sable 
region of Florida’s Everglades National Park (USA), where 
forest mortality and peat collapse triggered by the powerful 
1935 Labor Day Hurricane – the most intense tropical cyclone 
to make landfall in the USA (Landsea et al., 2015) – resulted 
in the local loss of mangrove forests, which were replaced by 
mudflat ecosystems (Bischof, 1995; Wanless and Vlaswinkel, 
2005; Smith et al., 2009). Another example of peat collapse oc-
curred in the Bay Islands of Honduras, where mass mangrove 
mortality caused by Hurricane Mitch resulted in rapid eleva-
tion losses 18–33 months after the storm (11 mm year
–1) due to 
decomposition of root material and sediment compaction, and 
which were modelled to continue for at least another 8 years at 
a reduced rate (7 mm year
–1) (Cahoon et al., 2003).
In contrast to these examples of negative cyclone effects, 
there are many examples of positive effects of tropical cyclones 
on soil surface elevation change. Tropical cyclones have the po-
tential to deliver nutrient-rich sediments to mangrove forests 
(Castañeda-Moya et  al., 2010, 2013; Lovelock et  al., 2011; 
Smoak et al., 2013; Breithaupt et al., 2014, 2017). Although 
excessive sedimentation can bury roots and lead to mortality 
(Ellison, 1998; Paling et al., 2008), moderate sediment deposits 
can stimulate plant growth and produce immediate gains in 
soil surface elevation. For example, in the Florida Everglades, 
Hurricane Wilma deposited up to 8  cm of sediment onto the 
forest surface; sediment deposition during this storm was nega-
tively correlated with distance upstream and was estimated to 
be equivalent to between 18 000 and 27 000 dump truck loads 
of sediment (Smith et al., 2009; Whelan et al., 2009). While a 
portion of this storm sediment was lost due to erosion, much 
of it was quickly stabilized by the upward growth of mangrove 
roots. Using pre- and post-Wilma measurements at surface 
elevation table-marker horizon (SET-MH) stations, Whelan 
et al. (2009) found that some of the gains in elevation due to 
the storm sedimentation were later offset by compaction below 
the soil surface; however, the net elevation effect of the storm 
during the measurement period was positive, resulting in a net 
rate of change that was greater than the rate of relative sea-
level rise (Whelan et al., 2009; Feher et al., 2019) (Fig. 6). In 
the Everglades, most of the cyclone-derived sediments come 
from the ocean; however, in watersheds that are more sediment 
rich, tropical cyclones also have the potential to deliver terri-
genous sediments to mangroves from upstream ecosystems. 
Given the potential for future increases in storm intensity, it is 
possible that sediment delivery and elevation change in some 
mangrove forests could increase. However, long-term elevation 
change data from mangrove forests are rare, and there is clearly 
a need to advance understanding of the contribution of storm 
sediments to long-term elevation changes relative to rising sea 
levels.
In addition to affecting local responses to sea-level rise via 
elevation changes, tropical cyclones also have the potential to 
facilitate landward migration and adaptation to sea-level rise by 
transporting mangrove propagules long distances, into upslope 
and/or upriver locations. For example, in the south-eastern USA 
and the Caribbean, a portion of the hurricane season coincides 
with the timing of mangrove propagule production. As a result, 
cyclones and other tropical storms can transport propagules 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
229
longer distances than possible under normal tidal fluctuations. 
Peterson and Bell (2012, 2015) demonstrate the critical role of 
high water events, such as storm surges, for lifting mangrove 
propagules above vegetative barriers and across the mangrove 
ecotone, where they may become entrapped and established 
within an adjacent plant community. These cyclone-mediated, 
long-distance dispersal events can facilitate mangrove land-
ward migration in response to sea-level rise.
CLIMATE CHANGE AND TROPICAL CYCLONE 
EFFECTS ON MANGROVES
In the coming century, the global frequency of tropical cyclones 
is expected either to decrease or remain essentially unchanged 
in response to climate change (Christensen et al., 2013; Kossin 
et al., 2017). However, at the global scale, climate change is 
expected to: (1) increase the frequency of the most intense trop-
ical cyclones; (2) increase the amount of rainfall produced by 
tropical cyclones near the cyclone centre; and (3) increase the 
poleward distribution of tropical cyclones (Knutson et al., 2010, 
2015; Christensen et al., 2013; Sobel et al., 2016; Kossin et al. 
2017; Patricola and Wehner, 2018). Collectively, these projec-
tions indicate that tropical cyclone effects on mangrove forests 
in some regions could be amplified in the future. However, future 
changes in cyclone activity are less consistent, and challenging 
to predict at the regional scale. Increases in cyclone intensity 
may increase the frequency of extreme events that result in local 
mangrove mortality, peat collapse and mangrove conversion to 
open water. Tropical cyclone effects will also be modulated by 
interactions with other aspects of climate and land use change 
(Osland et al., 2018; Sippo et al., 2018). For example, rising sea 
levels and increased precipitation are expected to increase storm 
surge effects, and the poleward expansion of tropical cyclone 
pathways may enhance the long-distance poleward dispersal of 
mangrove propagules (Van der Stocken, 2019a, b; I. C. Feller, 
pers. commun.), which could facilitate the poleward expansion 
of mangrove forests in response to warming winter temperat-
ures. Moreover, anthropogenic activities, such as urban and 
agricultural encroachment, can lead to habitat fragmentation 
and nutrient enrichment, which can affect mangrove responses 
to tropical cyclones (Feller et al., 2015). As noted throughout 
this review, mangrove forests are highly resilient ecosystems 
that have continuously adjusted to dynamic, ever changing abi-
otic conditions at the land–sea interface. In response to past 
changes in climate and sea level, mangrove forests have used 
long-distance dispersal mechanisms to migrate to new positions 
in the landscape as well as biogeomorphic feedbacks to adapt 
locally. In the coming century, mangrove forests will use these 
same mechanisms to adapt to future change. From a coastal 
management perspective, humans can help facilitate mangrove 
adaptation to climate change by restoring favourable abiotic 
conditions in existing mangrove forest as well as ensuring that 
landward migration corridors are available for future migration 
into adjacent upland and upriver ecosystems (Enwright et al., 
2016; Borchert et al., 2018).
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES FOR 
ADDITIONAL STUDY
The influence of tropical cyclones on structural characteristics 
of mangrove forests depends not only on storm characteristics, 
but also on ecogeomorphic location, stand structure, previous 
wind events, regeneration present before the storm, seed and 
propagule dispersal potential after the storm, nutrient condi-
tions, the characteristics of individual species present in the 
mangrove forest being affected and whether hydrological pro-
cesses have been altered before the cyclone (Fig. 7). With con-
tinued study, we may one day improve predictions of mangrove 
ecosystem responses to individual tropical cyclone events; 
however, we might also anticipate that wide-scale convergence 
in responses will be elusive given the variable trajectories of re-
sponses to tropical cyclones created by legacies inherent to any 
one forest (Fig. 7). Indeed, mangroves have an ability to recover 
from damage and reduce impacts of tropical cyclones, which 
limits many of the perceived negative effects over longer time 
frames contributing to their reputation for being ‘disturbance 
adapted’. Cyclones are also a source of potentially important 
sediment amendments and can facilitate dispersal of mangroves 
far inland. It is evident that having mangroves along a coast-
line provides important protective roles from surge and winds. 
A  greater understanding of surge suppression by mangroves 
could be facilitated by additional empirical assessments to in-
clude water-level observations after multiple tropical cyclone 
events to improve modelling.
Mangrove studies should also focus on establishing, measuring 
and re-measuring long-term forest plots after singular and repeti-
tive tropical cyclones to understand recovery and resilience with 
iterative effect, a condition that may become more common in 
the future with climate change. Along with this is a fundamental 
need to measure, at the mangrove scale of study, the wind energy 
70
Hurricane Wilma
24 October 2005
Accretion
Shallow RSET
Original SET
Deep RSET
60
50
Soil surface elevation (mm)
40
30
20
10
–10
18 March
2002
18 March
2003
18 March
2004
18 March
2005
18 March
2006
0
Fig. 6. Sedimentation patterns relative to various soil depths from 
Hurricane Wilma in a mangrove forest in Everglades National Park, 
Florida, USA (after Whelan et  al., 2009). ‘Accretion’ represents the depos-
ition of sediment on the soil surface, and ‘Shallow RSET’, ‘Original SET’ and 
‘Deep RSET’ represent the influence that sediment deposition had on different 
segments of the soil profile to include depths of approx. 0–0.35, 0–4 and 0–6 m, 
respectively. Reprinted by permission from Springer Nature Customer Service 
Centre GmbH: Wetlands [Hurricane Wilma’s impact on overall soil elevation 
and zones within the soil profile in a mangrove forest], K. R. T. Whelan, 2009.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
230
being dissipated by the event; not knowing the wind speed in re-
lation to measurements of response will keep ecologists guessing 
forever. Efforts should be made to incorporate these long-term 
forest and wind observations into modelling efforts of post-
cyclone recovery such that society can understand their require-
ments for recovery and availability for future storm shielding. 
Likewise, if society is to become increasingly dependent on the 
ecosystem services and recovery of mangrove ecosystems during 
and after tropical cyclones, more effort must be made to identify 
mangrove stress on large spatial scales far in advance of tropical 
cyclone impact so that they can be rehabilitated and remain re-
silient to storm effects (sensu Lewis et al., 2016). Stress comes 
in many forms, intended and unintended, but all chronic stress 
affects recovery from acute events in mangroves.
It is also a point of curiosity to understand the unique micro-
climatic conditions faced by residual standing mangrove trees 
after a tropical cyclone, created by increased temperatures, 
reduced or enhanced albedo, greater vapour pressure deficits 
and larger fluxes of sunlight. Surviving the short-term effects 
of the tropical cyclone might not be enough. While mangroves 
are extremely tolerant of harsh environmental conditions 
within a forest stand setting, there may be thresholds to in-
dividual seedling, sapling or tree tolerances when short-term 
pulses of sunlight or alterations in microclimatic conditions 
occur, potentially facilitating delayed mortality of residual 
plants, which would need to be included in tropical cyclone 
recovery models. Spatially expansive mangrove forests may 
be far more resilient to tropical cyclones than smaller stands 
because the effect is aligned with cyclone trajectory and is 
partial, with surviving areas serving as seed and propagule 
sources for affected areas. More information is also needed 
to determine whether sedimentation events from tropical 
cyclones have a true long-term positive influence on eleva-
tion trajectories in mangrove forests in partially offsetting 
sea-level rise. Finally, some effort should be directed toward 
understanding what causes mangroves to be most resilient to 
cyclones. Does maintaining hydrological connectivity matter 
most, or are disturbance legacies or other aspects of soil bio-
geochemistry as important? If the right aspects of the trop-
ical cyclone response and recovery are known among multiple 
mangrove ecosystems throughout the world, then perhaps 
management action can target greater resilience of those eco-
systems to tropical cyclone events.
FUNDING
This review was supported by the USGS Land Change 
Science R&D Program, USGS LandCarbon Program, USGS 
TROPICAL CYCLONE DISTURBANCE EVENT
DRIVERS
MECHANISMS
of EFFECT
CHANGE in MANGROVE
ECOSYTEM PROPERTIES
Wind
INITIAL SYSTEM PROPERTIES
NEW
DRIVERS
MANGROVE
ECOSYSTEM
WITH
DISTURBANCE
LEGACIES
RECOVERING
MANGROVE
ECOSYSTEM
QUASI-EQUILIBRIUM
MANGROVE
ECOSYSTEM STATE
SUCCESSION NATURAL
vARIABILITY
INTERNAL PROCESSES
Structural injury
Growth rates
Subsequent tropical cyclones
Hydrological modifications
Harvesting
Sea-level rise
Temperature changes
Rainfall changes
Tsunamis
Lightning
Shorter forests
Dead stems
Woody debris
Lower elevations
Greater flooding
Species composition
Biogeochemical cycling
Competitive interactions
Regeneration
Respiration
Stand structure
Advance regeneration
Propagule/seed availability
Debris trapping
Coppicing/sprouting
Biogeochemical conditions
Vascular system repair
Biomass removal
Root burial
Scour
Peat collapse/compaction
Anaerobiosis
Surge
Rain
Sediment
Fig. 7. An integrated, disaggregated view of the effects of tropical cyclone disturbances on mangrove ecosystems (adapted from Peters et  al., 
2011). This conceptual framework includes the effects of an individual tropical cyclone event (large blue box) as well as the contributions of subsequent events 
and other environmental factors towards the ecosystem reaching a quasi-equilibrium state. In the large blue box, an individual tropical cyclone event consists of 
three measurable components: (1) the environmental drivers; (2) the initial system properties; and (3) the biological and physical mechanisms of effect. Together, 
these three components result in a change in ecosystem properties (red symbol and text) and a mangrove ecosystem state with disturbance legacies. Following the 
cyclone disturbance event (areas outside of the large blue box), subsequent environmental drivers and successional processes (blue symbol and text) will produce 
a recovering mangrove ecosystem. Ultimately, recurrent disturbance events may produce a quasi-equilibrium ecosystem state with natural variability in ecosystem 
dynamics (orange symbol and text). Examples are provided as bullets throughout the conceptual framework. Mangroves are especially adept at tolerating legacy 
effects of past disturbance through this disaggregated view, creating the notion that mangroves are disturbance-adapted ecosystems.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
231
Environments Program and USGS Greater Everglades Priority 
Ecosystem Science Program.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Mick E. Hanley (University of Plymouth) and Tjeerd 
J. Bouma (Utrecht University) for the invitation to develop this 
review article, and Ariel E. Lugo (USDA Forest Service, Puerto 
Rico), Brita J. Jessen (Rookery Bay National Estuarine Research 
Reserve), Hannah  L. Mossman (Manchester Metropolitan 
University) and one anonymous referee for reviewing a pre-
vious draft. We thank Thomas W. Doyle, Thomas J. Smith III, 
Kevin R. T. Whelan and Vic Engel for assistance with table and 
figure review and/or data referenced in this review.
LITERATURE CITED
Adame MF, Zaldívar-Jimenez A, Teutli C, et al. 2013. Drivers of mangrove 
litterfall within a karstic region affected by frequent hurricanes. Biotropica 
45: 147–154.
Allen JA, Krauss KW. 2006. Influence of propagules flotation longevity and 
light availability on establishment of introduced mangrove species to 
Hawaii. Pacific Science 60: 367–376.
Allen JA, Ewel KC, Keeland BD, Tara T, Smith TJ III. 2000. Downed wood 
in Micronesian mangrove forests. Wetlands 20: 169–176.
Allen  JA, Ewel  KC, Jack  J. 2001. Patterns of natural and anthropogenic 
disturbance of the mangroves on the Pacific Island of Kosrae. Wetlands 
Ecology and Management 9: 279–289.
Alongi DM. 2008. Mangrove forests: resilience, protection from tsunamis, and 
responses to global climate change. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 
76: 1–13.
Amir AA. 2012. Canopy gaps and the natural regeneration of Matang man-
groves. Forest Ecology and Management 269: 60–67.
Amiro BD, Barr AG, Barr JD, et al. 2010. Ecosystem carbon dioxide fluxes 
after disturbance in forests of North America. Journal of Geophysical 
Research 115: G00K02. doi.org/10.1029/2010JG001390.
Aung  TT, Mochida  Y, Than  MM. 2013. Prediction of recovery pathways 
of cyclone-disturbed mangroves in the mega delta of Myanmar. Forest 
Ecology and Management 293: 103–113.
Baird AH, Bhalla RS, Kerr AM, Pelkey NW, Srinivas V . 2009. Do mangroves 
provide an effective barrier to storm surge? Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA 106: E111. doi: 10.1073/pnas.09008799106.
Baldwin  AH, Platt  WJ, Gathen  KL, Lessmann  JM, Rauch  TJ. 1995. 
Hurricane damage and regeneration in fringe mangrove forests of 
southeast Florida, USA. Journal of Coastal Research SI 21: 169–183.
Baldwin A, Egnotovich M, Ford M, Platt W. 2001. Regeneration in fringe 
mangrove forests damaged by Hurricane Andrew. Plant Ecology 157: 
149–162.
Ball MC, Farquhar GD. 1984. Photosynthetic and stomatal responses of two 
mangrove species, Aegiceras corniculatum and Avicennia marina, to long 
term salinity and humidity conditions. Plant Physiology 74: 1–6.
Barr  JG, Engel  V , Smith  TJ III, Fuentes  JD. 2012. Hurricane disturb-
ance and recovery of energy balance, CO
2 fluxes and canopy structure 
in a mangrove forest of the Florida Everglades. Agricultural and Forest 
Meteorology 153: 54–66.
Bashan  Y, Moreno  M, Salazar  BG, Alvarez  L. 2013. Restoration and re-
covery of hurricane-damaged mangroves using the knickpoint retreat 
effect and tides as dredging tools. Journal of Environmental Management 
116: 196–203.
Bischof BG. 1995. Aerial photographic analysis of coastal and estuarine man-
grove system dynamics of the Everglades National Park, Florida, in re-
sponse to hurricanes: implications for the continuing sea-level rise. MS 
Thesis, University of Miami. Coral Gables, FL.
Björkman O, Demmig B, Andrews TJ. 1988. Mangrove photosynthesis: re-
sponse to high-irradiance stress. Australian Journal of Plant Physiology 
15: 43–61.
Borchert SM, Osland MJ, Enwright NM, Griffith KT. 2018. Coastal wet-
land adaptation to sea-level rise: quantifying the potential for landward 
migration and coastal squeeze in northern Gulf of Mexico estuaries. 
Journal of Applied Ecology 55: 2876–2887.
Bouillon  S, Borges  A V , Castañeda-Moya  E, et  al. 2008. Mangrove pro-
duction and carbon sinks: a revision of global budget estimates. Global 
Biogeochemical Cycles 22: GB2013. doi: 10.1029/2007GB003052.
Breithaupt JL, Smoak JM, Smith TJ III, Sanders CJ. 2014. Temporal vari-
ability of carbon and nutrient burial, sediment accretion, and mass accu-
mulation over the past century in a carbonate platform mangrove forest of 
the Florida Everglades. Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences 
119: 2032–2048.
Breithaupt  JL, Smoak  JM, Rivera-Monroy  VH, et  al. 2017. Partitioning 
the relative contributions of organic matter and mineral sediment to ac-
cretion rates in carbonate platform mangrove soils. Marine Geology 390: 
170–180.
Brinkman RM, Massel SR, Ridd PV , Furakawa K. 1997. Surface wave at-
tenuation in mangrove forests. In: Proceedings of the 13th Australasian 
coastal and ocean engineering conference and the 6th Australasian 
port and harbour conference, V olume 2. Christchurch, NZ: Centre for 
Advanced Engineering, University of Canterbury.
Brokaw  NVL, Grear  JS. 1991. Forest structure before and after Hurricane 
Hugo at three elevations in the Luquillo Mountains, Puerto Rico. 
Biotropica 23: 386–392.
Brokaw NVL, Walker LR. 1991. Summary of the effects of Caribbean hurri-
canes on vegetation. Biotropica 23: 442–447.
Cahoon DR, Hensel P, Rybczyk J, McKee KL, Proffitt CE, Perez BC.  
2003. Mass tree mortality leads to mangrove peat collapse at Bay 
Islands, Honduras after Hurricane Mitch. Journal of Ecology 91: 
1093–1105.
Castañeda-Moya  E, Twilley  RR, Rivera-Monroy  VH, Zhang  K, 
Davis SEIII, Ross M. 2010. Sediment and nutrient deposition associated 
with Hurricane Wilma in mangroves of the Florida Coastal Everglades. 
Estuaries and Coasts 33: 45–58.
Castañeda-Moya E, Twilley RR, Rivera-Monroy VH. 2013. Allocation of 
biomass and net primary productivity of mangrove forests along environ-
mental gradients in the Florida Coastal Everglades, USA. Forest Ecology 
and Management 307: 226–241.
Chapman VJ. 1976. Mangrove vegetation. Germany: J. Cramer.
Cheeseman  JM. 1991. The analysis pf photosynthetic performance in 
leaves under field conditions: a case study using Bruguiera mangroves. 
Photosynthesis Research 29: 11–22.
Chen H, Lu W, Yan G, Yang S, Lin G. 2014. Typhoons exert significant but 
differential impacts on net ecosystem carbon exchange of subtropical 
mangrove forests in China. Biogeosciences 11: 5323–5333.
Chen R, Twilley RR. 1999. A simulation model of organic matter and nutrient 
accumulation in mangrove wetland soils. Biogeochemistry 44: 93–118.
Christensen JH, Kumar KK, Aldrian W, et al. 2013. Climate phenomena and 
their relevance for future regional climate change. In: Stocker TF, Qin D, 
Plattner  GK, et  al., eds. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science 
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I  to the Fifth Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.
Clarke PJ, Kerrigan RA, Westphal CJ. 2001. Dispersal potential and early 
growth in 14 tropical mangroves: do early life history traits correlate with 
patterns of adult distribution? Journal of Ecology 89: 648–659.
Clough BF, Sim RG. 1989. Changes in gas exchange characteristics and water 
use efficiency of mangroves in response to salinity and vapour pressure 
deficit. Oecologia 79: 38–44.
Coutts MP. 1986. Components of tree stability in Sitka spruce on peaty gley 
soil. Forestry 59: 173–195.
Craighead  FC, Gilbert  VC. 1962. The effects of Hurricane Donna on the 
vegetation of southern Florida. Quarterly Journal of the Florida Academy 
of Science 25: 1–28.
Dahdouh-Guebas F, Jayatissa LP. 2009. A bibliometrical review on pre- 
and post-tsunami assumptions and facts about mangroves and other 
coastal vegetation as protective buffers. Ruhuna Journal of Science 4: 
28–50.
Dahdouh-Guebas  F, Jayatissa  LP, Di Nitto  D, Bosire  JO, Lo Seen  D, 
Koedam N. 
2005. How effective were mangroves as a defence against the 
recent tsunami? Current Biology 15: R443–R447.
Danielsen F, Sørensen MK, Olwig MF, et al. 2005. The Asian tsunami: a pro-
tective role for coastal vegetation. Science 310: 643.
Danielson  TM, Rivera-Monroy  VH, Castañeda-Moya  E, et  al. 2017. 
Assessment of Everglades mangrove forest resilience: implications for 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
232
above-ground net primary productivity and carbon dynamics. Forest 
Ecology and Management 404: 115–125.
Das  S, Vincent  JR. 2009. Mangroves protected villages and reduced death 
toll during Indian super cyclone. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, USA 106: 7357–7360.
Davis SE III, Cable JE, Childers DL, et al. 2004. Importance of storm events 
in controlling ecosystem structure and function in a Florida gulf coast es-
tuary. Journal of Coastal Research 20: 1198–1208.
Dixon HH, Joly J. 1894. On the ascent of sap. Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 186: 563–576.
Donato  DC, Kauffman  JB, Murdiyarso  D, Kurnianto  S, Stidham  M, 
Kanninen M. 2011. Mangroves among the most carbon-rich forests in the 
tropics. Nature Geoscience 4: 293–297.
Doyle  TW, Girod  GF. 1997. The frequency and intensity of Atlantic hurri-
canes and their influence on the structure of south Florida mangrove 
communities. In: Diaz  HF, Pulwarty  RS, eds. Hurricanes: climate and 
socioeconomic impacts. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer, 109–120.
Doyle  TW, Smith TJ III, Robblee  MB. 1995. Wind damage effects of 
Hurricane Andrew on mangrove communities along the southwest coast 
of Florida, USA. Journal of Coastal Research Special Issue 21: 159–168.
Doyle TW, Krauss KW, Wells CJ. 2009. Landscape analysis and patterns of 
hurricane impact and circulation on mangrove forests of the Everglades. 
Wetlands 29: 44–53.
Drexler  JZ. 2001. Maximum longevities of Rhizophora apiculata and 
R. mucronata propagules. Pacific Science 55: 17–22.
Duke NC, Ball MC, Ellison JC. 1998. Factors influencing biodiversity and 
distributional gradients in mangroves. Global Ecology and Biogeography 
Letters 7: 27–47.
Dutta D, Das PK, Paul S, Sharma JR, Dadhwal VK. 2015. Assessment of 
ecological disturbance in the mangrove forest of Sundarbans caused by 
cyclones using MODIS time-series data (2001–2011). Natural Hazards 
79: 775–790.
Ellison JC. 1998. Impacts of sediment burial on mangroves. Marine Pollution 
Bulletin 37: 420–426.
Enwright NM, Griffith KT, Osland MJ. 2016. Barriers to and opportunities 
for landward migration of coastal wetlands with sea-level rise. Frontiers 
in Ecology and the Environment 14: 307–316.
Farquhar GD, Ball MC, von Caemmerer S, Roksandic Z. 1982. Effect of 
salinity and humidity on 
13C values of halophytes – evidence for diffusional 
isotopic fractionation determined by the ratio of intercellular/atmospheric 
CO
2 under different environmental conditions. Oecologia 52: 121–137.
Feher  LC, Osland  MJ, Anderson  GH, Vervaeke   WC, Krauss  KW, 
Whelan  KRT, Balentine  KM, Tiling-Range  G, Smith III  TJ, 
Cahoon DR. 2019. The long-term effects of hurricanes Wilma and Irma 
on soil elevation change in Everglades mangrove forests. Ecosystems doi: 
10.1007/s10021-019-00446-x
Feller  IC, Dangremond  EM, Devlin  DJ, Lovelock  CE, Proffitt  CE, 
Rodriguez W. 2015. Nutrient enrichment intensifies hurricane impact in 
scrub mangrove ecosystems in the Indian River Lagoon, Florida, USA. 
Journal of Ecology 96: 2960–2972.
Feller IC, Friess DA, Krauss KW, Lewis RR III. 2017. The state of the world’s 
mangroves in the 21st century under climate change. Hydrobiologia 803: 
1–12.
Ferwerda JG, Ketner P, McGuinness KA. 2007. Differences in regeneration 
between hurricane damaged and clear-cut mangrove stands 25 years after 
clearing. Hydrobiologia 591: 35–45.
Friess DA, Rogers K, Lovelock CE, et al. 2019. The state of the world’s man-
grove forests: past, present, and future. Annual Review of Environment and 
Resources 44: 16.1–16.27.
Gedan KB, Kirwan ML, Wolanski E, Barbier EB, Silliman BR. 2011. The 
present and future role of coastal wetland vegetation in protecting shore-
lines: answering recent challenges to the paradigm. Climatic Change 106: 
7–29.
Gill  AM, Tomlinson  PB. 1969. Studies on the growth of red mangrove 
(Rhizophora mangle L.): I. Habitat and general morphology. Biotropica 
1: 1–9.
Giri C, Ochieng E, Tieszen LL, et al. 2011. Status and distribution of man-
grove forests of the world using earth observation satellite data. Global 
Ecology and Biogeography 20: 154–159.
Hamilton SE, Casey D. 2016. Creation of a high spatio-temporal resolution 
global database of continuous mangrove forest cover for the 21st century 
(CGMFC-21). Global Ecology and Biogeography 25: 729–738.
Harmon ME, Hua C. 1991. Coarse woody debris dynamics in two old-growth 
ecosystems. BioScience 41: 604–610.
Harmon  ME, Franklin  JF, Swanson  FJ, et  al. 1986. Ecology of coarse 
woody debris in temperate ecosystems. Advances in Ecological Research 
15: 133–302.
Harris RJ, Milbrandt EC, Everham EM III, Bovard BD. 2010. The effects 
of reduced tidal flushing on mangrove structure and function across a dis-
turbance gradient. Estuaries and Coasts 33: 1176–1185.
Helms JA, ed. 1998. The dictionary of forestry. Bethesda, MD: The Society of 
American Foresters.
House Document. 1965. Letter from the Secretary of the Army, United States 
Army Corps of Engineers, Morgan City and vicinity, Louisiana. United 
States Congress Serial Set, 1965–1966, V ol. 14-2, Serial 12690-2, House 
Document No. 167.
Imbert D, Labbé P, Rousteau A. 1996. Hurricane damage and forest struc-
ture in Guadeloupe, French West Indies. Journal of Tropical Ecology 12: 
663–680.
Jones  MC, Wingard  GL, Stackhouse  B, et  al. 2019. Rapid inundation of 
southern Florida coastline despite low relative sea-level rise rates during 
the late-Holocene. Nature Communications 10: 3231.
Jordan CL, Hurt DA, Lowrey CA. 1960. On the structure of Hurricane Daisy 
on 27 August 1958. Journal of Meteorology 17: 337–348.
Kamthonkiat D, Rodfai C, Saiwanrungkul A, Koshimura S, Matsuoka M. 
2011. Geoinformatics in mangrove monitoring: damage and recovery after 
the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami in Phang Nga, Thailand. Natural Hazards 
and Earth System Science 11: 1851–1862.
Kauffman JB, Cole TG. 2010. Micronesian mangrove forest structure and tree 
responses to a severe typhoon. Wetlands 30: 1077–1084.
Kennedy JP, Pil MW, Proffitt CE, Boeger W A, Stanford AM, Devlin DJ. 
2016. Postglacial expansion pathways of red mangrove, Rhizophora 
mangle, in the Caribbean Basin and Florida. American Journal of Botany 
103: 260–276.
Knapp KR, Kruk MC, Levinson DH, Diamond HJ, Neumann CJ. 2010. 
The International Best Track Archive for Climate Stewardship (IBTrACS): 
unifying tropical cyclone best track data. Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society 91: 363–376.
Knutson TR, McBride JL, Chan J, et al. 2010. Tropical cyclones and climate 
change. Nature Geoscience 3: 157–163.
Knutson TR, Sirutis JJ, Zhao M, et al. 2015. Global projections of intense 
tropical cyclone activity for the late twenty-first century from dynam-
ical downscaling of CMIP5/RCP4.5 scenarios. Journal of Climate 28: 
7203–7224.
Kominoski JS, Gaiser EE, Baer SG. 2018. Advancing theories of ecosystem 
development through long-term ecological research. BioScience 68: 
554–562.
Kossin JP, Hall T, Knutson T, et al. 2017. 
Extreme storms. In: Wuebbles DJ, 
Fahey  DW, Hibbard  KA, Dokken  DJ, Stewart  BC, Maycock  TK, eds. 
Climate Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, 
Volume I. Washington, DC: U.S. Global Change Research Program, 
375–404.
Kovacs JM, Blanco-Correa M, Flores-Verdugo F. 2001. A logistic regression 
model of hurricane impacts in a mangrove forest of the Mexican Pacific. 
Journal of Coastal Research 17: 30–37.
Krauss KW, Allen JA. 2003. Influence of salinity and shade on seedling photo-
synthesis and growth of two mangrove species, Rhizophora mangle and 
Bruguiera sexangula, introduced to Hawaii. Aquatic Botany 77: 311–324.
Krauss  KW, Doyle  TW, Twilley  RR, Smith  TJ III, Whelan  KRT, 
Sullivan  JK. 2005. Woody debris in the mangrove forests of south 
Florida. Biotropica 37: 9–15.
Krauss KW, Lovelock CE, McKee KL, et al.  2008. Environmental drivers in 
mangrove establishment and early development: a review. Aquatic Botany 
89: 105–127.
Krauss  KW, Doyle  TW, Doyle  TJ, et  al. 2009. Water level observations 
in mangrove swamps during two hurricanes in Florida. Wetlands 29: 
142–149.
Krauss KW, McKee KL, Lovelock CE, et al. 2014. How mangrove forests 
adjust to rising sea level. New Phytologist 202: 19–34.
Krauss KW, Barr JG, Engel V , Fuentes JD, Wang H. 2015. Approximations 
of stand water use versus evapotranspiration from three mangrove forests in 
southwest Florida, USA. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 213: 291–303.
Lamborn RH. 1890. The knees of the bald cypress: a new theory of their func-
tion. Science 15: 65–67.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
233
Landsea  C, Franklin  J, Beven  J. 2015. The Revised Atlantic Hurricane 
Database (HURDAT2). NOAA National Hurricane Center. Available on-
line at: nhc.noaa.gov/data/#hurdat.
Lang’at JKS, Kairo JG, Mencuccini M, et al. 2014. Rapid losses of surface 
elevation following tree girdling and cutting in tropical mangroves. PLoS 
One 9: e107868. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118334.
Lee  SY, Primavera  JH, Dahdouh-Guebas  F, et  al. 2014. Ecological role 
and services of tropical mangrove ecosystems: a reassessment. Global 
Ecology and Biogeography 23: 726–743.
Lewis RR III, Milbrandt EC, Brown B, et al. 2016. Stress in mangrove for-
ests: early detection and preemptive rehabilitation are essential for future 
successful worldwide mangrove forest management. Marine Pollution 
Bulletin 109: 764–771.
Liu H, Zhang K, Li Y, Xie L. 2013. Numerical study of the sensitivity of man-
groves in reducing storm surge and flooding to hurricane characteristics in 
southern Florida. Continental Shelf Research 64: 51–65.
Long  J, Giri  C, Primavera  J, Trivedi  M. 2016. Damage and recovery as-
sessment of the Philippines’ mangroves following Super Typhoon Haiyan. 
Marine Pollution Bulletin 109: 734–743.
López-Hoffman  L, Anten  NPR, Martínez-Ramos  M, Ackerly  DD. 2007. 
Salinity and light interactively affect neotropical mangrove seedlings at 
the leaf and whole plant levels. Oecologia 150: 545–556.
Lovelock CE, Feller IC, Adame MF, et al. 2011. Intense storms and the de-
livery of materials that relieve nutrient limitations in mangroves of an arid 
zone estuary. Functional Plant Biology 38: 514–522.
Lovelock  CE, Krauss  KW, Osland  MJ, Reef  R, Ball  MC. 2016. The 
physiology of mangrove trees with changing climate. In: Goldstein  G, 
Santiago LS, eds. Tropical tree physiology: adaptations and responses in 
a changing environment. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 149–179.
Lowe  JK, Gregory  JM, Flather  RA. 2001. Changes in the occurrence of 
storm surges around the United Kingdom under a future climate scenario 
using a dynamic storm surge model driven by the Hadley Centre climate 
models. Climate Dynamics 18: 179–188.
Lugo  AE. 1986. Mangrove understory: an expensive luxury? Journal of 
Tropical Ecology 2: 287–288.
Lugo AE. 2000. Effects and outcomes of Caribbean hurricanes in a climate 
change scenario. The Science of the Total Environment 262: 243–251.
Lugo AE, Snedaker SC. 1974. The ecology of mangroves. Annual Review of 
Ecology and Systematics 5: 39–64.
Lugo AE, Cintrón G, Goenaga C. 1981. Mangrove ecosystems under stress. 
In: Barret  GW, Rosenberg  R, eds. Stress effects on natural ecosystems. 
Chichester, UK: John Wiley and Sons Limited, 129–153
Lugo  AE, Applefield  M, Pool  DJ, McDonald  RB. 1983. The impact of 
Hurricane David on the forests of Dominica. Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research 13: 201–211.
Macamo CCF, Massuanganhe E, Nicolau DK, Bandeira SO, Adams JB. 
2016. Mangrove’s response to cyclone Eline (2000): what is happening 
14 years later. Aquatic Botany 134: 10–17.
Mazda Y, Magi M, Kogo M, Hong PN. 1997a. Mangroves as a coastal pro-
tection from waves in the Tong King Delta, Vietnam. Mangroves and Salt 
Marshes 1: 127–135.
Mazda Y, Wolanski E, King B, Sase A, Ohtsuka D, Magi M. 1997b. Drag 
force due to vegetation in mangrove swamps. Mangroves and Salt Marshes 
1: 193–199.
McCoy ED, Mushinsky HR, Johnson D, Meshaka WE Jr. 1996. Mangrove 
damage caused by Hurricane Andrew on the southwestern coast of Florida. 
Bulletin of Marine Science 59: 1–8.
McGuinness KA. 1996. Dispersal, establishment and survival of Ceriops tagal 
propagules in a north Australian mangrove forest. Oecologia 109: 80–87.
McKee  KL, Cahoon  DR, Feller  IC. 2007. Caribbean mangroves adjust to 
rising sea level through biotic controls on change in soil elevation. Global 
Ecology and Biogeography 16: 545–556.
Middleton BA, McKee KL. 2001. Degradation of mangrove tissues and impli-
cations for peat formation in Belizean island forests. Journal of Ecology 
89: 818–828.
Myers RK, van Lear DH. 1998. Hurricane–fire interactions in coastal forests 
of the south: a review and hypothesis. Forest Ecology and Management 
103: 265–276.
Narayan S, Suzuki T, Stive MJF, Verhagen HJ, Ursem WNJ, Ranasinghe R. 
2010. On the effectiveness of mangroves in attenuating cyclone-induced waves. 
In: McKee-Smith J, Lynett P, eds. Proceedings of 32nd conference on coastal 
engineering, No. 32. Shanghai, China: American Society of Civil Engineers.
Novlan DJ, Gray WM. 1974. Hurricane-spawned tornadoes. Monthly Weather 
Review 102: 476–488.
Odum  EP. 1969. The strategy of ecosystem development. Science 164: 
262–270.
Odum WE, Johannes RE. 1975. The response of mangrove to man-induced 
environmental stress. In: Wood EFJ, Johannes RE, eds. Tropical marine 
pollution. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 52–62.
O’Halloran TL, Law BE, Goulden ML, et al. 2012. Radiative forcing of nat-
ural forest disturbances. Global Change Biology 18: 555–565.
Osland MJ, Enwright N, Day RH, Doyle TW. 2013. Winter climate change 
and coastal wetland foundation species: salt marshes versus mangrove 
forests in the southeastern United States. Global Change Biology 19: 
1482–1494.
Osland  MJ, Feher  LC, López-Portillo  J, et  al. 2018. Mangrove forests in 
a rapidly changing world: global change impacts and conservation op-
portunities along the Gulf of Mexico coast. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf 
Science 214: 120–140.
Paling EI, Kobryn HT, Humphreys G. 2008. Assessing the extent of man-
grove change caused by Cyclone Vance in the eastern Exmouth Gulf, 
northwestern Australia. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 77: 603–613.
Patricola CM, Wehner MF. 2018. Anthropogenic influences on major tropical 
cyclone events. Nature 563: 339–346.
Peltola H, Kellomäki S, Hassinen A, Granander M. 2000. Mechanical sta-
bility of Scots pine, Norway spruce and birch: an analysis of tree-pulling 
experiments in Finland. Forest Ecology and Management 135: 143–153.
Peters DPC, Lugo AE, Chapin FS III, et al. 2011. Cross-system comparisons 
elucidate disturbance complexities and generalities. Ecosphere 2: Article 
81.
Peterson JM, Bell SS. 2012. Tidal events and salt-marsh structure influence 
black mangrove (Avicennia germinans) recruitment across and ecotone. 
Ecology 93: 1648–1658.
Peterson JM, Bell SS. 2015. Saltmarsh boundary modulates dispersal of man-
grove propagules: implications for mangrove migration with sea-level 
rise. PLoS One 10: e0119128. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119128.
Pinzón ZS, Ewel KC, Putz FE. 2003. Gap formation and seedling regener -
ation in mangrove forests in Micronesia. Journal of Tropical Ecology 19: 
143–153.
Piou C, Feller IC, Berger U, Chi F. 2006. Zonation patterns of Belizean off-
shore mangrove forests 41 years after a catastrophic hurricane. Biotropica 
38: 365–374.
Poret  N, Twilley  RR, Rivera-Monroy  VH, Coronado-Molina  C. 2007. 
Belowground decomposition of mangrove roots in Florida coastal 
Everglades. Estuaries and Coasts 30: 491–496.
Press  MC, Brown  ND, Barker  MG, Zipperlen  SW.
 1996. Photosynthetic 
responses to light in tropical rain forest tree seedlings. In: Swaine MD, 
ed. The ecology of tropical forest tree seedlings. New York: The Parthenon 
Publishing Group, 41–58.
Primavera JH, de la Crux M, Montilijo C, et al. 2016. Preliminary assess-
ment of post-Haiyan mangrove damage and short-term recovery in Eastern 
Samar, central Philippines. Marine Pollution Bulletin 109: 744–750.
Rabinowitz D. 1978. Dispersal properties of mangrove propagules. Biotropica 
10: 47–57.
Reef  R, Lovelock  CE. 2015. Regulation of water balance in mangroves. 
Annals of Botany 115: 385–395.
Resio DT, Westerink JJ. 2008. Modeling the physics of storm surges. Physics 
Today 61: 33–38.
Rivera-Monroy VH, Twilley RR, Davis SE III, et al. 2011. The role of the 
Everglades Mangrove Ecotone Region (EMER) in regulating nutrient 
cycling and wetland productivity in south Florida. Critical Reviews in 
Environmental Science and Technology 41: 633–669.
Robertson AI, Daniel PA. 1989. Decomposition and the annual flux of de-
tritus from fallen timber in tropical mangrove forests. Limnology and 
Oceanography 34: 640–646.
Romero LM, Smith TJ III, Fourqurean JW. 2005. Change in mass and nu-
trient content of wood during decomposition in a south Florida mangrove 
forest. Journal of Ecology 93: 618–631.
Ross MS, Ruiz PL, Sah JP, Reed DL, Walters J, Meeder JF. 2006. Early 
post-hurricane stand development in fringe mangrove forests of con-
trasting productivity. Plant Ecology 185: 283–297.
Roth LC. 1992. Hurricanes and mangrove regeneration: effects of Hurricane 
Joan, October 1988, on the vegetation of Isla del Venado, Bluefields, 
Nicaragua. Biotropica 24: 375–384.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026

Krauss and Osland — Tropical cyclones and mangrove forests
234
Rovai AS, Twilley RR, Castañeda-Moya E, et al. 2018. Global controls 
on carbon storage in mangrove soils. Nature Climate Change 8: 
534–538.
Saenger P. 2002. Mangrove ecology, silviculture, and conservation. Dordrecht, 
The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Saenger P, Snedaker SC. 1993. Pantropical trends in mangrove above-ground 
biomass and annual litterfall. Oecologia 96: 293–299.
Saintilan  N, Wilson  NC, Rogers  K, Rajkaran  A, Krauss  KW. 2014. 
Mangrove expansion and salt marsh decline at mangrove poleward limits. 
Global Change Biology 20: 147–157.
Salmo SG, Lovelock CE, Duke NC. 2014. Assessment of vegetation and soil 
characteristics in restored mangroves interrupted by severe tropical ty-
phoon ‘Chan-hom’ in the Philippines. Hydrobiologia 733: 85–102.
Sellier D, Fourcaud T. 2009. Crown structure and wood properties: influence 
on tree sway and response to high winds. American Journal of Botany 96: 
885–896.
Shea DJ, Gray WM. 1973. The hurricane’s inner core region. I. Symmetric 
and asymmetric structure. Journal of Atmospheric Science 30: 1544–1564.
Sheng YP, Lapetina A, Ma G. 2012. The reduction of storm surge by vege-
tation canopies: three-dimensional simulations. Journal of Geophysical 
Research 39: L20601.
Sherman RE, Fahey TJ, Battles JJ. 2000. Small-scale disturbance and re-
generation dynamics in a neotropical mangrove forest. Journal of Ecology 
88: 165–178.
Sherman RE, Fahey TJ, Martinez P. 2001. Hurricane impacts on a mangrove 
forest in the Dominican Republic: damage patterns and early recovery. 
Biotropica 33: 393–408.
Sherrod  CL, McMillan  C. 1985. The distributional history and ecology of 
mangrove vegetation along the Northern Gulf of Mexico coastal region. 
Contributions in Marine Science 28: 129–140.
Simard M, Fatoyinbo L, Smetanka C, et al. 2019. Mangrove canopy height 
globally related to precipitation, temperature and cyclone frequency. 
Nature Geoscience 12: 40–45.
Sippo JZ, Lovelock CE, Santos IR, Sanders CJ, Maher DT. 2018. Mangrove 
mortality in a changing climate: an overview. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf 
Science 215: 241–249.
Smith TJ III, Robblee MB, Wanless HR, Doyle TW. 1994. Mangroves, hur-
ricanes, and lightning strikes. BioScience 44: 256–262.
Smith TJ III, Anderson GH, Balentine K, Tiling G, Ward GA, Whelan KRT. 
2009. Cumulative impacts of hurricanes on Florida mangrove ecosystems: 
sediment deposition, storm surges and vegetation. Wetlands 29: 24–34.
Smoak JM, Breithaupt JL, Smith TJ III, Sanders CJ. 2013. Sediment ac-
cretion and organic carbon burial relative to sea-level rise and storm events 
in two mangrove forests in Everglades National Park. Catena 104: 58–66.
Snedaker  SC. 1995. Mangroves and climate change in the Florida and 
Caribbean region: scenarios and hypotheses. Hydrobiologia 295: 43–49.
Snedaker  SC. 2002. Mangrove ecology, silviculture, and conservation. 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Snedaker  SC, Lahmann  EJ. 1988. Mangrove overstory absence: a conse-
quence of evolution? Journal of Tropical Ecology 4: 311–314.
Sobel AH, Camargo SJ, Hall TM, Lee C-Y, Tippett MK, Wing AA. 2016. 
Human influence on tropical cyclone intensity. Science 353: 242–246.
Steinke  TD, Ward  CJ. 1989. Some effects of the cyclones Domoina and 
Imboa on mangrove communities in the St Lucia Estuary. South African 
Journal of Botany 55: 340–348.
Stocker  GC. 1976. Report on cyclone damage to natural vegetation in 
the Darwin Area after Cyclone Tracey, 25 December 1974 [Northern 
Territory]. Leaflet No. 127, Canberra, Australia: Forestry and Timber 
Bureau.
Stoddart DR. 1969. Post-hurricane changes on the British Honduras reefs and 
cays: re-survey of 1965. Atoll Research Bulletin No. 131, Washington, 
DC: The Smithsonian Institute.
von  Storch  H, Woth  K. 2008. Storm surges: perspectives and options. 
Sustainability Science 3: 33–43.
Tomlinson  PB. 2016. The botany of mangroves, 2nd edn. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.
Twilley  RR, Rovai  AS, Riul  P. 2018. Coastal morphology explains global 
blue carbon distributions. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 16: 
503–508.
Vandermeer  J, de  la  Cerda  IG, Boucher  D, Perfecto  I, Ruiz  J. 2000. 
Hurricane disturbance and tropical tree species diversity. Science 290: 
788–791.
Van der Stocken T, Carroll D, Menemenlis D, Simard M, Koedam N. 2019a. 
Global-scale dispersal and connectivity in mangroves. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA 116: 915–922.
Van der Stocken T, Wee AK, De Ryck DJ, et al. 2019b. A general frame-
work for propagule dispersal in mangroves. Biological Reviews 94: 
1547–1575.
Vogt J, Skóra A, Feller IC, Piou C, Coldren G, Berger U. 2012. Investigating 
the role of impoundment and forest structure on the resistance and resili-
ence of mangrove forests to hurricanes. Aquatic Botany 97: 24–29.
Wadsworth FH, Englerth GH. 1959. Effects of the 1956 hurricane on forests 
in Puerto Rico. Caribbean Forester 20: 38–51.
Walker  LR. 1995. Timing of post-hurricane tree mortality in Puerto Rico. 
Journal of Tropical Ecology 11: 315–320.
Wanless HR, Vlaswinkel BM. 2005. Coastal landscape and channel evolu-
tion affecting critical habitats at Cape Sable, Everglades National Park, 
Florida. Final Report to Everglades National Park.
Ward RD, Friess DA, Day RH, MacKenzie RA. 2016. Impacts of climate 
change on mangrove ecosystems: a region by region overview. Ecosystem 
Health and Sustainability 2: e01211. doi: 10.1002/ehs2.1211.
Wells NC. 2012. The atmosphere and ocean, 3rd edn, Chichester, UK: John 
Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Whelan  KRT. 2005. The successional dynamics of lightning-initiated 
canopy gaps in the mangrove forests of Shark River, Everglades 
National Park, USA. PhD Dissertation, Florida International University, 
Miami, FL.
Whelan KRT, Smith TJ III, Anderson GH, Ouellette ML. 2009. Hurricane 
Wilma’s impact on overall soil elevation and zones within the soil profile 
in a mangrove forest. Wetlands 29: 16–23.
Woodroffe CD, Grime D. 1999. Storm impact and evolution of a mangrove-
fringed chenier plain, Shoal Bay, Darwin, Australia. Marine Geology 159: 
303–321.
Woodroffe CD, Grindrod J. 1991. Mangrove biogeography: the role of qua-
ternary environmental and sea-level change. Journal of Biogeography 18: 
479–492.
Woodroffe  CD, Rogers  K, McKee  KL, Lovelock  CE, Mendelssohn  I, 
Saintilan N. 2016. Mangrove sedimentation and response to relative sea-
level rise. Annual Review of Marine Science 8: 243–266.
Zhang K, Liu H, Li Y, et al. 2012. The role of mangroves in attenuating storm 
surges. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 102–103: 11–23.
Zhang  K, Thapa  B, Ross  M, Gann  D. 2016. Remote sensing of seasonal 
changes and disturbances in mangrove forest: a case study from South 
Florida. Ecosphere 7: e01366. doi: 10.1002/ecs2.1366.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/aob/article/125/2/213/5585844 by guest on 05 March 2026
