Estimating the cost of capital for renewable energy projects
Bjarne Steffen a,b,⁎
a Department of Humanities, Social and Political Sciences, Energy Politics Group, ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland
b Institute of Science, Technology and Policy, ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 3 April 2019
Received in revised form 16 April 2020
Accepted 1 May 2020
Available online 15 May 2020
Keywords:
Investment
Discount rate
Financing cost
Debt
Equity
CAPM
JEL classiﬁcation:
G12
G31
G32
L94
Q42
Q48
Many models in energy economics assess the cost of alternative power generation technologies. As an input, the
models require well-calibrated assumptions for the cost of capital or discount rates to be used, especially for re-
newable energy for which the cost of capital differs widely across countries and technologies. In this article, we
review the spectrum of estimation methods for the private cost of capital for renewable energy projects and dis-
cuss appropriate use of the methods to yield unbiased results. We then evaluate the empirical evidence from 46
countries for the period 2009–2017. We ﬁnd a globally consistent rank order among technologies, with the cost
of capital increasing from solar PV to onshore wind to offshore wind power. On average, the cost of capital in de-
veloping countries is signiﬁcantly higher than in industrialized countries, with large heterogeneity also within
the groups of industrialized or developing countries.
© 2020 The Author. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
1. Introduction
With power generation being the largest contributor to anthropo-
genic CO2 emissions, decarbonization of the sector ranks high on policy
agendas worldwide. To this end, many countries are targeting the de-
ployment of renewable energy (RE) technologies, some of which have
grown rapidly since the turn of the century. To achieve the goals of
the Paris Agreement, however, the deployment of RE must be even fur-
ther accelerated, as illustrated by the fact that emission pathways in line
with the agreement's 1.5–2 °C target always assume a strong increase in
wind and solar capacity (Luderer et al., 2018). These quantitative results
are supported by analytical analyses which show that early investments
in clean energy plants can lead to pathways that reduce emissions efﬁ-
ciently in the presence of knowledge accumulation (Acemoglu et al.,
2012; Goulder and Mathai, 2000) and long-lived abatement capital
(Vogt-Schilb et al., 2018).
As the expansion of RE generation requires large investments, a
sound understanding of the costs and beneﬁts of RE technologies is
necessary to effectively decarbonize the power sector on an efﬁcient
path. With the growing deployment of RE, energy economists have
studied the cost of RE generation from various angles, informing
policymakers and investors about the cost and value of different RE
technologies (cf. e.g. Borenstein, 2012; Fell and Linn, 2013; Hirth,
2013; Joskow, 2011; May, 2017; Scholz et al., 2017; Zhang et al.,
2016). By now, estimations of RE generation cost from economic model-
ing have become an integral part of long-term energy scenarios that in-
form the global climate policy discourse (cf. Creutzig et al., 2017;
Luderer et al., 2017; Pietzcker et al., 2017).
In model setups that compare capital-intense RE technologies with
less capital-intense fossil fuel–based technologies, a precise representa-
tion of the cost of capital for RE projects (which is reﬂected in discount
rates) is a prerequisite for meaningful quantitative results. The reason is
that deploying RE technologies requires large up-front investments that
must be ﬁnanced. Thus, the cost of capital makes up a signiﬁcant part of
the lifecycle costs of RE projects; for example, in recent years, for solar
photovoltaics (PV) in Germany the cost of capital totaled 12–37% of
the levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) (Egli et al., 2018). In developing
countries like Brazil or India, cost of capital can even account for 50%
of the LCOE for solar PV (Schmidt, 2014). Borenstein (Borenstein,
2012) illustrates how solar PV generation cost changes immensely
Energy Economics 88 (2020) 104783
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Humanities, Social and Political Sciences,
Energy Politics Group, ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland.
E-mail address: bjarne.steffen@gess.ethz.ch.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2020.104783
0140-9883/© 2020 The Author. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Energy Economics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eneeco
depending on the interest rate assumed. Fossil fuel–based power gener-
ation, in contrast, is less affected by its cost of capital as a large part of
the lifecycle costs are fuel expenditures which do not have to be ﬁ-
nanced up front (Schmidt, 2014). Accordingly, model-based research
has illustrated that cost-efﬁcient technology choices are highly sensitive
to the assumed cost of capital or discount rate (Hirth and Steckel, 2016;
Iyer et al., 2015; Stocks, 1984; Sweerts et al., 2019).
From a theoretical point of view, an important difference needs to be
made between the social and the private cost of capital. The social cost of
capital, i.e. the discount rate that maximizes intertemporal social wel-
fare, is required to derive socially optimal pathways, including for cli-
mate change mitigation investments. Theoretical and empirical work
over the last decades made progress in quantifying the social cost of
capital, though substantial disagreement on the appropriate choice of
parameters remains (cf. e.g. Arrow et al., 2014; Dietz et al., 2018;
Weitzman, 2007). In contrast, the private cost of capital, i.e. the discount
rate used in private investment appraisals, is required to model invest-
ment decisions by ﬁrms that choose between alternatives (such as dif-
ferent power generation technologies) in a world that deviates from
the theoretical optimum. Common applications in energy economics in-
clude the projection of RE expansion pathways, the assessment whether
certain carbon emission targets will be reached, and the ex-ante evalu-
ation of policy interventions that affect the relative revenue or cost po-
sition of technologies. For discounting in such applications, it is not the
(normative) social discount rate that matters, but the (empirical) pri-
vate discount rate for potential investment projects. This article focuses
on the private discount rate, more commonly referred to as cost of cap-
ital in an empirical context.1
Although sound assumptions about the private cost of capital are
crucial for sensibly calibrated models, suitable empirical data is hardly
available to researchers (Donovan and Nuñez, 2012; Egli et al., 2018).
The key reason is that many RE projects are realized using project ﬁ-
nance in which the ﬁnancial details remain private information
(Steffen, 2018). Unlike in corporate ﬁnance setups in which the cost of
capital is often visible from publicly traded securities, typical RE project
ﬁnance structures combine non-traded equity investment with bank
debt, and “ﬁnancing models used by companies are conﬁdential, mak-
ing it impossible to know or to verify the actual values used by project
developers” (Dobrotkova et al., 2018, p. 136). Cost of capital is typically
considered a trade secret, and thus, is often not disclosed (Krupa and
Harvey, 2017). Although the lack of transparency is less of an issue for
RE investors (who know their cost of capital for a speciﬁc project), it is
a challenge for researchers and policymakers alike (Egli et al., 2018).
In particular, assuming a standard discount rate is often inappropriate
in energy system models given the high sensitivity of results to this pa-
rameter (Iyer et al., 2015; Schmidt, 2014).
Further complicating the matter, empirical data show large varia-
tions in RE cost of capital along several dimensions. Most importantly,
the cost of capital differs widely between countries (Angelopoulos
et al., 2016; Egli et al., 2019). In many cases, the spread in the cost of cap-
ital is the determining factor for LCOE differences between countries,
not solar irradiation or wind resources (Dobrotkova et al., 2018;
Ondraczek et al., 2015). Even within countries, there might be structural
differences between different RE technologies, and the cost of capital
can change over time due to RE-speciﬁc effects or economy-wide varia-
tions in the interest rate (Egli et al., 2018; Kirkpatrick and Bennear,
2014).
Realizing the need for a better understanding of RE cost of capital, a
number of scholars recently started to estimate such data in various
ways (see Section 5). However, besides considering a very diverse set
of countries and technologies, studies used different measures for the
cost of capital, making it hard to compare the estimates. The scholars
also applied very different estimation methods, ranging from ﬁnancial
market econometrics to qualitative interviews. Thus, although progress
has been made in estimating RE cost of capital in speciﬁc contexts, a
consistent picture of the overall state of knowledge is missing. Making
appropriate assumptions about the cost of capital in investment and en-
ergy system models remains challenging. To address this challenge,
here we present a systematic review of the global empirical evidence
on RE cost of capital, to answer two research questions:
1. Which methods are appropriate for estimating the cost of capital for
RE projects?
2. What is the state of the empirical knowledge?
Based on the review results, we discuss the large heterogeneity in
the cost of capital that can be observed, and implications for energy sys-
tem modelers, energy economists more generally, and RE policy
makers. The remainder of the article is structured as follows: Section 2
provides a conceptual background concerning the cost of capital for
RE projects. Section 3 outlines the methodology of this review, and
Section 4 describes the literature base we analyzed for both research
questions (RQ). Results concerning appropriate estimation methods
(RQ 1) are summarized in Section 5, an empirical analysis of the quan-
titative evidence (RQ 2) is presented in Section 6. The ﬁnal section
concludes.
2. Characteristics of cost of capital for renewable energy
Understanding investment in and ﬁnancing of renewable energy as-
sets is of interest for scholars in several economics ﬁelds (e.g., energy
and environmental economics, energy system modeling, and ﬁnancial
economics) with differing conceptualizations of the cost of capital or
discount rates. For clarity of analysis, we provide a brief description of
ﬁnancing structures and cost of capital measures as understood in this
article, and we summarize extant research on the expected heterogene-
ity in the cost of capital between renewable energy assets.
2.1. Financing structures for renewable energy projects
Similar to other infrastructure assets, power plants can be ﬁnanced
either through corporate ﬁnance structures (i.e., “on balance sheet”,
for instance of a utility), or project ﬁnance structures (i.e., “off balance
sheet”, in a new legal entity). While many fossil fuel–based power
plants have traditionally been realized by utilities in corporate ﬁnance
structures, the surge of renewable energy investments over the last
two decades was driven by a much broader set of sponsors drawing
on project ﬁnance (Henderson, 2016; Steffen, 2018). In 2015, project ﬁ-
nance was used in more than half of all new investment in RE projects
worldwide, and in even higher shares in OECD countries (Steffen,
2018). Therefore, in this article, we focus on this RE-speciﬁc ﬁnancing
structure.
In project ﬁnance, the sponsor creates a self-contained legal entity
(or special purpose vehicle, SPV) to hold the RE asset, which then is ﬁ-
nanced by debt and equity on the level of the SPV. For repayment, equity
investors and debt providers depend solely on the future cash ﬂows of
the RE project, and cannot recourse on other assets of the project spon-
sor. Thus, the investment risk proﬁle of the RE project, and the corre-
sponding cost of capital, is speciﬁc to the individual investment
project (Hainz and Kleimeier, 2012; Krupa and Harvey, 2017; Steffen,
2018).
2.2. Measures of the cost of capital
While various deﬁnitions for the private cost of capital exist (cf.
Helms et al., 2015), here we follow the common economic understand-
ing of “the expected rate of return that market participants require in
order to attract funds to a particular investment” (Pratt and
Grabowski, 2014, p. 3), expressed as percentage value. Describing the
1 Note that private cost of capital are also often referred to as WACC (weighted average
cost of capital); see Section 2.2 for a precise deﬁnition.
2
B. Steffen / Energy Economics 88 (2020) 104783
expected returns, the cost of capital is a forward-looking measure com-
prising the time value of money and a premium for risk (as well as po-
tentially further factors, such as taxes or transaction costs). The cost of
capital is equal to the discount rate as used in investment appraisals,
such as net present value calculations.
For investments that use more than one type of capital (e.g., equity
and debt), the overall cost of capital is a combination of the returns of
the different components. In the most simple formulation, the weighted
average cost of capital (WACC), sometimes termed “vanilla WACC”
(Estache and Steichen, 2015), is deﬁned as
WACCvanilla ¼ δ Cd þ 1−δ
ð
ÞCe;
ð1Þ
where δ is the debt share (in %), Cd is the cost of debt (in %), and Ce is the
expected return on equity (in %). The vanilla WACC abstracts from any
considerations of tax. In most countries, however, interest payments
are tax-deductible expenses for companies; thus, debt comes with a
tax beneﬁt. This fact is reﬂected in the after-tax WACC
WACCafter−tax ¼ δ 1−τ
ð
Þ Cd þ 1−δ
ð
ÞCe;
ð2Þ
where τ is the corporate tax rate. Hence, interest payable on debt is al-
ready factored in taxable proﬁts here. In some cases (e.g., for regulators
that want to deﬁne prices which allow a company to meet corporate tax
liabilities and deliver a certain return on debt and equity), the pre-tax
WACC is calculated as
WACCpre−tax ¼ δ Cd þ 1−δ
ð
Þ
1
1−τ
ð
ÞCe;
ð3Þ
where 1 / (1- τ) is the tax wedge on the cost of equity. All three deﬁni-
tions are used in articles concerning renewable energy projects. As the
debt share varies signiﬁcantly between countries, between technolo-
gies, and over time, the advantage of tax-deductible interest payments
must be considered for a meaningful comparison. Therefore, we follow
the majority of the literature in using the after-tax WACC wherever pos-
sible in this review (note that WACCpre-tax and WACCafter-tax can be con-
verted into each other as long as the tax rate τ is known and constant
over time).
Although the cost of capital is usually stated in nominal terms, in
contexts with uncertain future inﬂation, sometimes, the deﬂated
WACC is used to describe the cost of capital excluding inﬂation expecta-
tions. The two values can be converted using Fisher's equation
1 þ WACCnominal ¼
1 þ WACCreal


1 þ w
ð
Þ;
ð4Þ
where w is the expected inﬂation rate. Finally, all values can refer either
to investors in the local currency (the standard case considered in this
review) or to investors from a hard currency area, by including the pre-
mium they require for investments in the local currency (Shrimali et al.,
2013).
2.3. Expected heterogeneity among projects
It is common in ﬁnancial economics to conceptually decompose the
expected rate of returns into a risk-free rate (reﬂecting the time value of
money) and a risk premium (reﬂecting the investment-speciﬁc risk
(Pratt and Grabowski, 2014). While the risk-free rate should not differ
between investment alternatives, it is primarily the risk premium that
causes the variance in the observed cost of capital (differences in taxes
and transaction costs can also play a role). A wide range of literature
uses investor surveys to assess the nature of investment risks related
to renewable energy assets (Angelopoulos et al., 2016; Egli, 2020;
Lüthi and Wüstenhagen, 2012; Salm, 2018; Salm and Wüstenhagen,
2018; Waissbein et al., 2018, 2013). These studies provide an indication
of which factors lead to differences in the cost of capital between groups
of projects (notwithstanding idiosyncratic factors of each setting). Three
dimensions are pertinent to deﬁne our analysis.
First, the country in which a RE project will be undertaken affects the
overall investment risk. Investors consider country-level aspects, such
as macroeconomic stability and political uncertainties for long-term
commitments (Steffen and Papakonstantinou, 2015; Waissbein et al.,
2013). For RE projects in contexts where the cash ﬂow depends on pay-
ments from a public entity (e.g., from a feed-in tariff or from a power
purchase agreement, PPA), also the experience with the RE-speciﬁc pol-
icy framework matters (Egli et al., 2018; Estache and Steichen, 2015;
Lüthi and Wüstenhagen, 2012). An investor's perception of risks related
to the regulatory framework can thereby be moderated by individual
worldviews (Chassot et al., 2014). Depending on the design of a feed-
in tariff or a PPA, there might also be different levels of electricity market
risk exposure for RE generation (Neuhoff et al., 2018; Polzin et al., 2019;
Salm and Wüstenhagen, 2018). In addition, the general state of ﬁnancial
markets differs between countries, affecting capital-intense sectors,
such as RE (Kim and Park, 2016).
Second, investment risk differs between different RE technologies
(Polzin et al., 2019; Salm, 2018). For instance, the resource risk related
to solar irradiation is typically lower than the resource risk related to
wind (Tietjen et al., 2016). In addition, solar PV plants and wind turbines
are based on very different operating principles, and thus, the opera-
tional risks (component failures, hazards, etc.) differ. Rotating equip-
ment like a wind turbine is prone to more wear and tear as compared
to photoelectric systems like solar PV, hence the share of uncertain com-
ponent repairs in operating cost is much higher for wind turbines than
for solar PV (Steffen et al., 2020).
Third, both country- and technology-speciﬁc investment risks can
vary over time (Egli, 2020; Mazzucato and Semieniuk, 2018). As new
technologies are deployed, they become increasingly mature, and in-
vestment risk decreases, because of proven track records and increased
the availability of data for such track records (Egli et al., 2018). In addi-
tion, investors and banks become more experienced in ﬁnancing RE
projects, improving their risk assessment processes (ibid.). Changes in
regulatory frameworks can likewise affect RE investment risks (Leisen
et al., 2019). Finally, in addition to RE-speciﬁc factors, the general inter-
est rate environment has changed considerably over the last few de-
cades (especially following the 2007–2008 ﬁnancial crisis), affecting
RE cost of capital as well (Egli et al., 2018; Kirkpatrick and Bennear,
2014).
Taking these dimensions into account, in the following analysis we
differentiate empirical estimates for the cost of capital by country, tech-
nology, and ﬁnancing year. We also consider the impact of ﬂuctuating
general interest rates.
3. Methodology
This article is based on a systematic review of existing empirical
studies that quantify the cost of capital for renewable energy projects.
The methodology is summarized in Fig. 1. First, we compile a literature
base of relevant articles in an explicit and reproducible way. Second, we
evaluate the selected articles concerning the research methods that are
used for estimating the cost of capital, categorize the methods, and dis-
cuss their usability and limitations (RQ 1). Third, we extract empirical
data on the cost of capital, convert them into comparable quantities
using additional assumptions where necessary, compile a database suit-
able for a meta-analysis (Hunter and Schmidt, 2004), and discuss the
empirical results along descriptive charts and statistics (RQ 2). The indi-
vidual steps are described in more detail in the following.
3.1. Compilation of the literature base
To select the relevant articles in a reproducible way, we draw on
established protocols for systematic literature reviews in the social sci-
ences (Petticrew and Roberts, 2006). The literature search and selection
3
B. Steffen / Energy Economics 88 (2020) 104783
thereby follows a sequence of steps with inclusion and exclusion criteria
as follows: As the starting point, we consider all peer-reviewed litera-
ture (i.e., scientiﬁc journals, books, and conference proceedings) that
had been published until the end of 2018 and are covered in the abstract
database Scopus. Although in principle other types of archival docu-
ments (e.g., policy reports and press articles) contain information on
the cost of capital for renewable energy projects, focusing on peer-
reviewed literature means that all studies have been subject to some re-
view concerning their methodological quality (Cooper, 1998), though of
varying scrutiny depending on, inter alia, the journal. Limiting the anal-
ysis to peer-reviewed papers in the Scopus database also ensures full re-
producibility of the literature search.
To address the research questions, we initially searched for articles
where the title, abstract, or keywords included a reference to cost of
capital (i.e., “cost of capital,” or the more general terms “ﬁnancing
cost,” “ﬁnancing conditions”) and a reference to the considered renew-
able energy technologies (i.e., “renewable energy” or “clean energy” or
“sustainable energy” or “solar” or “wind”). While evaluating the corre-
sponding initial list of 136 articles (described below), we conducted a
follow-up snowball sampling round of the articles cited in the initial ar-
ticles
(Cooper,
1998),
realizing
that
some
relevant
articles
circumscribed the cost of capital without using these search terms.
Therefore, we added the combination “risk premium” or “capital mar-
kets,” and “investment” (which included all articles that appeared dur-
ing the round of snowball sampling).2 The resulting long list includes
182 papers.
For the long list of articles, meta-data was extracted and the ab-
stracts were screened if the article could fulﬁl inclusion criteria in line
with our research scope: quantifying the cost of capital of renewable
energy-based power generation projects (solar PV, onshore wind tur-
bines, and offshore wind turbines) for utility-scale assets. The short
list includes 54 papers.
Next, we analyzed the full text of the short-listed papers in detail to
assess the suitability of the methodologies and results for this review.
We considered only articles that provide quantiﬁcations of the cost of
capital based on empirical evidence (excluding, for instance, sensitivity
analyses that study the impact of different WACC assumptions). Given
that this review focuses on technology-speciﬁc WACCs for project-
ﬁnanced renewable energy plants (see Section 2.1), we also excluded
articles that limit their discussion of the cost of capital to the
company-level WACC of energy utilities (Helms et al., 2015; Weaver,
2012) or country-level assumptions of economy-wide WACCs (e.g.
Labordena et al., 2017; Ondraczek et al., 2015). The remaining 19 arti-
cles (describing 18 studies) form the literature base for the review of
the estimation methods (research question 1) and the analysis of em-
pirical evidence (research question 2).
3.2. Review of estimation methods
For each of the 19 articles, we reviewed the methods used (short
summaries in Table 1). Most of the studies provided this information
as part of the main text or supplementary information. If questions
remained, we referred to cited literature or contacted the corresponding
authors to clarify. While reviewing the literature, we clustered the
methods used in the articles by similarity and iteratively reduced the
number of clusters until we arrived at the four basic approaches we de-
scribe in Section 5. The strengths and weaknesses of the different ap-
proaches are then discussed based on the discussions by the authors
who used these approaches, speciﬁc criticism in other articles, and a ho-
listic assessment taking into account the entire literature base.
3.3. Empirical analysis of cost of capital estimates
To summarize the empirical state of knowledge on RE cost of capital,
quantitative results from all studies in the literature base are compiled
in a database, including cost of debt, expected return on equity, debt
share, and WACC (depending on what is reported in the studies). Values
are considered separately per technology, per country, and per year. For
each empirical value, we also included a description of the methodology
used in the underlying article.
For studies that do not provide the WACCafter-tax, we converted the
WACCpre-tax as described in Section 2.2, using corporate tax rate τ for
the given country and year from KPMG (2018). Most studies report
nominal values; in a few cases where only real WACCs (i.e., excluding
inﬂation expectations) are provided, we also converted them into nom-
inal WACCs for comparability, using the expected inﬂation rate w men-
tioned in the respective studies. Converted values are listed as separate
entries together with the assumptions used. In total, the database in-
cludes 358 data points spanning the period 2000–2017 and covering
46 countries, and forms the basis for all empirical analyses in this article.
It is provided in the Supplementary Information.
As mentioned in Section 2.3, the years since renewable energy
projects were ﬁrst rolled out are characterized by substantial
changes in economy-wide interest rates, which must be considered
when the cost of capital is compared over time. As a proxy, Fig. 2
shows the 12-months London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), a
common benchmark interest rate, in different currencies. The ﬁgure
illustrates a regime change during the 2007–2008 ﬁnancial crisis:
LIBOR rates drop steeply in 2008, and then remain within a range
of about −0.5% to 2%, although with some variation within that
range. Therefore, when we aggregate the WACC estimates over
time, we limit the analysis to the period since 2009 and consider
WACCafter-tax as markups on the LIBOR (i.e., WACCafter-tax minus the
LIBOR rate), a common approach used by banks and ﬁnancial inves-
tors (Krupa and Harvey, 2017).3
4. Literature base
Table 1 provides details about all 18 studies that have been analyzed
in detail.4 Since the ﬁrst publication in 2009 (an analysis of renewable
energy costs in Italy), one to two relevant studies were published per
year, before the research output increased sharply in 2017–2018
(eight studies were published, and thus, are the bulk of the empirical ev-
idence). The authors' motivations for estimating the cost of capital dif-
fer: While early studies aim at generally decomposing the cost
Fig. 1. Summary of review methodology.
2 Final Scopus search string: TITLE-ABS-KEY((“cost of capital” OR “ﬁnancing cost” OR
“ﬁnancing conditions” OR (“risk premium” AND “investment”) OR (“capital markets”
AND “investment”)) AND (“renewable energy” OR “clean energy” OR “sustainable energy”
OR “solar” OR “wind”))
3 We use the 12-months LIBOR in GBP for the United Kingdom, in EUR for other
European countries, and in USD for non-European countries.
4 One study (entry no. 4) is described in two separate articles listed in Scopus.
4
B. Steffen / Energy Economics 88 (2020) 104783
structure of renewable energy projects and discuss cost-reduction path-
ways (e.g., Lorenzoni and Bano, 2009; Wood and Ross, 2012), several re-
cent articles focus narrowly on RE cost of capital (Angelopoulos et al.,
2016; Egli et al., 2018). Accordingly, studies also vary in the extent to
which the cost of individual capital components is being estimated
(see Table 1).
Table 1
Empirical coverage of articles included in the review.
No
Reference
Technologies
Countries
Years
Estimated cost of
capital components
Estimation method
CoD
CoE
DS
WACC
1
(Lorenzoni and
Bano, 2009)
Solar PV, onshore
wind, other
(hydro)
Italy
2007
x
x
x
Elicitation of cost of capital components of unspeciﬁed
project-ﬁnanced plants from ﬁnancial institutions
2
(Szabó et al.,
2010)
Solar PV, onshore
wind, other
(bioenergy)
Generic EU/United States
Unclear
x
Expert interviews to judge technology-speciﬁc risk
adjustments to standard values, archival information
3
(Donovan and
Nuñez, 2012)
Other (mix of
renewables)
Brazil, China, India
2009
x
Estimates from ﬁnancial market data, using the CAPM
adjusted for downside beta characteristics in
emerging markets
4
(Wood and
Ross, 2012)
Onshore wind,
offshore wind
Denmark, Germany, Netherlands,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United
States
2008
x
x
x
x
Compilation from national authorities as part of an
International Energy Agency (IEA) task, drawing on
elicitation of ﬁnancial details of speciﬁed actual
projects, or expert interviews
5
(Ardani et al.,
2013b, Ardani
et al., 2013a)
Solar PV
United States
2012
x
Expert interviews with various market participants
(including developers and ﬁnanciers), and archival
information
6
(Shrimali
et al., 2013)
Solar PV, onshore
wind
India
2010–2011
x
x
x
Elicitation of cost of capital components from
developers of speciﬁed projects, re-engineering of
debt share
7
(Estache and
Steichen,
2015)
Solar PV, offshore
wind, onshore
wind, other
(biomass)
Belgium
2012
x
Estimates from ﬁnancial market data using the CAPM
8
(Kitzing and
Weber, 2015)
Offshore wind
Germany
2014
x
x
x
x
Estimates from ﬁnancial market data, and archival
information
9
(Angelopoulos
et al., 2016)
Onshore wind
26 EU member states
2014
x
x
x
x
Expert interviews, using estimates from ﬁnancial
market data as the starting point for discussion
10
(Voormolen
et al., 2016)
Offshore wind
Belgium, Denmark, Germany,
Netherlands, United Kingdom
2012
x
Expert interviews to judge country-speciﬁc risk
adjustments, archival information including ﬁnancial
modeling by BNEF
11
(Angelopoulos
et al., 2017)
Solar PV, onshore
wind
Greece
2014–2016
x
x
x
x
Same as no. 9
12
(Krupa and
Harvey, 2017)
Other (mix of
renewables)
United States
2016
x
x
Expert interviews and archival information
13
(Kumar et al.,
2017)
Solar PV, onshore
wind, other
(biomass)
Cambodia, China, India, Malaysia,
Thailand, Vietnam
2016
x
x
x
Expert interviews with one country expert for each
country, and archival information
14
(Werner and
Scholtens,
2017)
Onshore wind
Germany
2000–2013
x
Estimates from ﬁnancial market data
15
(Apostoleris
et al., 2018)
Solar PV
Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates
2015, 2017
x
x
Analysis/re-engineering of a ﬁnancial model for
winning auction bids, based on archival information
16
(Dobrotkova
et al., 2018)
Solar PV
Brazil, Chile, El Salvador, Guatemala,
India, Jamaica, Mexico, Peru, South
Africa, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Zambia
2013–2016
x
Analysis/re-engineering of a ﬁnancial model for
winning auction bids, based on archival information
and expert interviews
17
(Egli et al.,
2018)
Solar PV, onshore
wind
Germany
2000–2017
x
x
x
x
Elicitation of cost of capital components of 133
projects from ﬁnancial institutions (banks and
investors)
18
(Partridge,
2018)
Onshore wind,
other (coal, gas)
Denmark, India, United States
2015, 2017
x
x
x
Estimates from ﬁnancial market data
Note: CoD = cost of debt, CoE = cost of equity, DS = debt share, WACC = weighted average cost of capital.
Fig. 2. General interest rate level over time.
5
B. Steffen / Energy Economics 88 (2020) 104783
Concerning technologies, onshore wind projects have been analyzed
in 11 studies, solar PV projects in 9 studies, and offshore wind projects in
4 studies, reﬂecting the different levels of maturity of the technologies.
With respect to geography, half of the studies look at only a single coun-
try, and several others compare a small set of countries. Only three stud-
ies analyze ﬁve or more OECD countries (Angelopoulos et al., 2016;
Voormolen et al., 2016; Wood and Ross, 2012), and only two studies an-
alyze ﬁve or more developing countries (Dobrotkova et al., 2018; Kumar
et al., 2017). Thus, the regional overlap is limited. We discuss the empir-
ical data below, following the review of the estimation methods.
5. Estimation methods for RE cost of capital
To answer the ﬁrst research question about which methods are ap-
propriate for estimating the cost of capital for RE projects, we present
and discuss the approaches taken in extant literature. Overall, the esti-
mation methods can be clustered into four general approaches that
are summarized in Fig. 3, structured in terms of the type of information
used: elicitation of project ﬁnance data and surveys of expert estimates aim
at gathering new data at the level of analysis which is of ﬁnal interest
(i.e., project-level ﬁnancing data). Given the challenges of retrieving in-
formation at this level, two other approaches use readily available data
from other areas: information about the speciﬁc project (and the gen-
eral RE market) for aspects other than the cost of capital in the replica-
tion of auction results or information about the cost of capital beyond
the speciﬁc project in the case of an analysis of ﬁnancial market data.
The different approaches will be described in turn, followed by an over-
arching discussion of suitability for different settings.
5.1. Elicitation of project ﬁnance data
The most direct way to quantify RE cost of capital is to collect and an-
alyze the cost of different capital components from speciﬁc RE project ﬁ-
nance deals, as listed in a term sheet or other documents held at the
involved ﬁnancial institutions. As mentioned above, eliciting such infor-
mation is often challenging given the conﬁdential nature of project ﬁ-
nance data (Dobrotkova et al., 2018; Egli et al., 2018; Krupa and
Harvey, 2017). Nevertheless, several scholars succeeded in gathering
such data, starting with Lorenzoni and Bano (Lorenzoni and Bano,
2009), who conducted a survey among investors in the Italian market
and presented granular ﬁgures for the components of the cost of capital
referring to “real project ﬁnanced plants as conﬁrmed by ﬁnancial insti-
tutions” (p. 103). Beyond the technology and the ﬁnancing year, no fur-
ther details about the projects are being provided. In a related approach,
the study edited by Wood and Ross (Wood and Ross, 2012) summarizes
a formal task of the International Energy Agency (IEA, an intergovern-
mental organization) for which seven national authorities collected
data, including the cost of capital. Some of the countries thereby provide
cost of capital data from speciﬁed projects, while others rely on expert
interviews (see Section 5.2). Shrimali et al. (Shrimali et al., 2013) elicit
ﬁnancial parameters for speciﬁed Indian wind and solar projects in in-
terviews with the developers of these projects.
Because the cost of capital in project ﬁnance-structures is asset spe-
ciﬁc, the external validity of the estimates from the elicited deal data is a
caveat. As Wood and Ross (Wood and Ross, 2012) note, it is hard to as-
sess whether single projects or deals used to estimate cost data are rep-
resentative of typical projects in the market, which is even more the
case if the projects are not identiﬁed, as in Lorenzo and Bano
(Lorenzoni and Bano, 2009). A way to address this challenge was pre-
sented by Egli et al. (Egli et al., 2018), who elicit data on a large number
of German projects that ﬁt pre-deﬁned characteristics, such as size and
technology.
5.2. Survey of expert estimates
Given the scarcity of deal data, many studies fall back on
interviewing RE market participants for their expert estimates, often
complemented by archival information (e.g., press articles that mention
the debt share of prominent projects). Experts can include project de-
velopers, ﬁnanciers, and consultants or academics. In contrast to project
data elicitation, interviewees do not reveal data on speciﬁc projects they
were involved in, but instead, estimate the typical cost of capital they
observe in the market. Examples include Ardani et al. (2013b, 2013a),
who interviewed 70 market participants in the United States; Krupa
and Harvey (2017), who combine discussions with Unites States “sector
participants” and archival information; Kumar et al. (Kumar et al.,
2017), who communicated with a “country expert” for each market
they analyzed; and some of the contributions in Wood and Ross
(Wood and Ross, 2012).
Compared to the elicitation of project data from speciﬁc deals, a
qualitative estimate of cost of capital can often be provided by a broader
set of interviewees, which facilitates the interview process. However,
selection criteria that are too vague might increase the uncertainty
concerning the representativeness of the estimates. While a general
agreement of interest rates and return expectations often exists
among participants in well-developed markets, such agreement is less
common in smaller and less mature markets (Angelopoulos et al.,
2016). In the latter, expert interviewees might express more of a “gut
feeling” about the cost of capital (i.e. a value based on their intuition,
not based on data), or they are not able to provide an estimate at all.
To formalize the process of expert estimations, and to facilitate dis-
cussions in small or immature markets, some authors chose to provide
benchmark rates to the interviewees as a starting point for discussion.
Voormolen et al. (2016) discuss country-speciﬁc risk adjustments of a
generic estimate from a ﬁnancial data provider (details on method in
3E, 2013). Taking a different approach for a broad study of 26 countries,
Angelopoulos et al. (2017, 2016) use a WACC estimate from ﬁnancial
market data (see Section 5.4) as a starting point for discussions with
80 experts. These experts were asked to provide a general assessment
whether and in which direction the actual market conditions deviate
Fig. 3. Estimation methods by type of data used.
6
B. Steffen / Energy Economics 88 (2020) 104783
from the estimates, and by what order of magnitude (see also Ecofys,
2016). Using this mixed-methods approach, the authors estimate the
components of the cost of capital for the broadest set of countries in
all available studies, although with varying precision (as indicated by
the broad ranges that are reported for some smaller markets). Finally,
researchers also proposed conducting formal choice experiments
(such as adaptive choice-based conjoint analysis) with investors. How-
ever, thus far, such experiments have been used to estimate risk pre-
miums only, not the level of the components of the cost of capital
(Salm, 2018; Salm and Wüstenhagen, 2018).
5.3. Replication of auction results
Recently, two studies (Apostoleris et al., 2018; Dobrotkova et al.,
2018) used a different approach to estimate the cost of capital, drawing
on non-ﬁnancing data for projects that were awarded a PPA in a com-
petitive auction. Since 2015–2016, policy support for solar and wind
plants in many countries was shifted to competitive auctions for PPAs
as a cost-effective mechanism for procuring renewable energy (Polzin
et al., 2019). Noticing that some auctions revealed very low prices for
PV generation in developing countries, Apostoleris et al. (Apostoleris
et al., 2018) and Dobrotkova et al. (Dobrotkova et al., 2018) aimed at
decomposing the cost structure of awarded projects.5 They exploit the
fact that much non-ﬁnancing information on the winning bids is pub-
licly available, including the remuneration per kilowatt hour generated
(i.e., the awarded PPA) and cost data, such as capital expenditures (as
PV modules and inverters are sold as global commodities at relatively
transparent price levels). Thus, the cost of capital is often the only miss-
ing piece of information. By constructing an LCOE model to replicate the
auction results, the authors estimate missing bits of information, such as
the cost of capital. In an analysis of auctions in the Middle East,
Apostoleris et al. (Apostoleris et al., 2018) mainly draw on archival in-
formation; the broader analysis for 13 developing countries by
Dobrotkova et al. (Dobrotkova et al., 2018) complements such data
with expert interviews at multilateral development banks.
5.4. Analysis of ﬁnancial market data
All of the studies discussed thus far rely on some kind of project-
level data. A separate stream of literature uses general ﬁnancial market
data to estimate RE cost of capital, more closely linked to the literature
on the cost of capital for listed companies (Pratt and Grabowski,
2014). As typical RE projects are unlisted entities (SPV), their cost of
debt and expected rate of return cannot be directly referred from the
prices of traded securities; thus, authors use market data proxies. The
expected return on equity and the cost of debt are estimated separately
in all studies in this review. Therefore, we discuss the two components
in turn. The debt share is typically not estimated from ﬁnancial market
data (as this project-speciﬁc parameter cannot be inferred from prices
of traded securities), but taken from archival information or expert in-
terviews as described above.
5.4.1. Market cost of debt
For listed companies, the cost of debt is directly available, for exam-
ple, from the current interest expenses as per ﬁnancial statements or
from the yield of the company's publicly traded bonds (Pratt and
Grabowski, 2014). Another proxy is the yield of bonds from a compara-
ble company with a similar credit rating (Courtois et al., 2012). These
approaches are also used to estimate the cost of debt for private RE as-
sets, even though typically no bonds are issued but the projects are ﬁ-
nanced with bank loans. Estache and Steichen (Estache and Steichen,
2015) use information from ﬁnancial statements of renewable energy
companies active in Belgium, with the challenge of small sample sizes
for individual technologies. Werner and Scholtens (Werner and
Scholtens, 2017) use a general medium-term yield corporate bond
index, claiming that these corporate bonds have a risk proﬁle similar
to that for wind energy projects. Partridge (Partridge, 2018) uses the
spread of utility bonds over the risk-free rate, and adds an assumed sur-
plus for renewable energy projects. A caveat to all these studies is
whether the market proxies used are appropriate for estimating the
cost of the bank debt for RE projects: Given the high debt share in pro-
ject ﬁnance, a precise cost of debt ﬁgure is crucial for reliable WACC
estimates.
A different approach to quantifying the cost of debt does not use the
yield of traded bonds, but instead, estimates project ﬁnance-speciﬁc
markups on the risk-free rate. In a study on Germany, Kitzing and
Weber (Kitzing and Weber, 2015) use archival information on the typ-
ical swap premium (pswap) and bank margin (BM) to be added to the
risk-free rate (German government bonds):
Cd ¼ r f þ pswap þ BM
ð5Þ
Their approach mirrors the interest rate calculation performed by a
bank lending to an SPV, but hinges on the availability of bank margins
and swap premiums which are often hard to obtain. Angelopoulos
et al. (2017, 2016) also use the German government bond rate as the
European risk-free rate, and add a CDS spread (the 10-year credit de-
fault swap quotation of the respective country), as well as an assumed
“renewable energy project spread” (PS) that covers risk elements spe-
ciﬁc to renewable energy projects (e.g. uncertainty related to the re-
newable energy policy, compare Section 2.3):
Cd ¼ r f þ CDS þ PS:
ð6Þ
They also discuss alternative approaches, for instance, drawing on
the LIBOR and spreads between government bonds of different coun-
tries, which all have in common that they are a combination of baseline
rate, a country spread, and an RE project spread. These approaches can
easily be applied to numerous countries, relying on the implicit assump-
tion that the RE project-speciﬁc markup does not vary across borders.
5.4.2. Market return on equity
For estimating the cost of equity, the capital asset pricing model
(CAPM), originally presented by Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965), is
the dominant framework. It is used by almost all practitioners in corpo-
rate ﬁnance and ﬁnancial advisory (Brotherson et al., 2013) despite
shortcomings that have been acknowledged in the academic literature
(mainly relating to stock return patterns that cannot be explained by
CAPM, particularly for stocks in emerging markets) (Donovan and
Nuñez, 2012; Fama and French, 1993). For RE projects, all reviewed
studies drawing on ﬁnancial market data use some variation of the
CAPM, estimating the expected return on equity as
Ce ¼ r f þ β rm−r f


;
ð7Þ
where rf is the risk-free rate, (rm – rf) is the market risk premium, and β
is a measure of the sensitivity of the expected asset returns to the ex-
pected market returns. The risk-free rate and the market risk premium
apply to the market as a whole, but the beta factor is asset-speciﬁc, and
thus, is the crucial parameter to be estimated.
For listed companies, betas are generally obtained by regressing in-
dividual stock returns against market returns, and quoted by ﬁnancial
data providers. For companies that are not publicly traded, the “pure-
play method” is to consider the beta of a comparable company (or a
group of companies) that has a similar risk structure (Courtois et al.,
2012). For example, Estache and Steichen (Estache and Steichen,
2015) use a sample of Belgian RE generation companies, and Werner
and Scholtens (Werner and Scholtens, 2017) consider independent
wind energy developing ﬁrms. However, the two studies do not
5 Although not within the technology scope of this review, Lilliestam and Pitz-Paal
(2018) apply the same method for concentrated solar power (CSP) projects.
7
B. Steffen / Energy Economics 88 (2020) 104783
explicitly consider that project-ﬁnanced RE assets likely have a much
higher debt share than the comparable portfolio, which affects the eq-
uity beta. For such situations, Courtois et al. (Courtois et al., 2012) de-
scribe a process of ﬁrst un-leveraging the beta to get a value that
includes the pure business risk, and then re-leveraging the beta to the
debt share of the entity under study. This approach is used by
Angelopoulos et al. (Angelopoulos et al., 2017, 2016) and by Partridge
(Partridge, 2018).
Although using beta as a risk measure is an established process for
developed countries, the standard CAPM seems to be less suitable for
developing countries and emerging markets (Courtois et al., 2012;
Donovan and Nuñez, 2012). To improve estimates in these countries,
Donovan and Nuñez use a “downside beta CAPM,” which allows for
non-normal return distributions as observed in emerging markets.
In sum, a variety of approaches use ﬁnancial market data from
traded securities as a proxy for the cost of debt and the return of equity
of private RE projects. The potentials and limitations of these ap-
proaches, and of the previously discussed estimation methods, is
discussed next.
5.5. Discussion of methods and their appropriateness
The review of methods emphasizes the challenges of estimating the
cost of capital for privately held entities in a newly emerging industry
such as RE. Researchers used different approaches depending on the in-
dividual studies' objectives, and the methods differ in terms of their ap-
propriateness to yield unbiased estimates in different settings.
By directly addressing project-level ﬁnancing data, both an elicita-
tion of project ﬁnance data and surveys of expert estimates avoid infer-
ences from other information on the variable of interest, and reduce
the danger of systematically biased inferences. In return, however,
these approaches raise questions about the representativeness of the
gathered data, with non-representative samples potentially introducing
a bias as well.
Although eliciting deal data for a large number of projects increases
the representativeness of the estimates, the process is time-consuming,
and is difﬁcult to scale to a larger set of countries. As this method uses
information from past deals only, it is also restricted to countries that
have a substantial number of comparable projects to allow for a large
n-analysis. Thus, the approach seems more suited for in-depth analyses
of single markets, and less suited for larger cross-country analyses, es-
pecially if less mature RE markets are included.
Using expert estimates addresses some of these limitations; how-
ever, representativeness might be even more of an issue given the sub-
jectivity involved. For example, meta-analyses of expert estimates in
energy technology forecasting showed a rather low level of agreement
between studies (Baker et al., 2015). Thus surveys of expert estimates
seem less appropriate for obtaining precise values, but rather suited
for an initial estimate of the cost of capital in a broader set of countries,
particularly for immature markets where project-speciﬁc ﬁnancing data
are unavailable.
Estimates based on the replication of auction results are representa-
tive of the cost of capital in a certain auction round, as long as all bids
that have been awarded a PPA are being analyzed. The precision of the
estimates depends on the extent and quality of available non-
ﬁnancing information (which differs according to the speciﬁc country
situation and actors involved). Naturally, the method is also limited to
markets where PPA auctions are held. In these cases, the replication of
auction results has shown to be a useful complement to expert inter-
views, by offering an empirical way to triangulate interviewee
estimates.
The estimates based on ﬁnancial market data build on a broad litera-
ture that quantiﬁes the cost of capital for listed companies, drawing on
the CAPM and its variants. By using accessible data, such as stock and
bond quotations, these approaches seem suitable for analyses that com-
pare the cost of capital in different countries for which market data are
available from ﬁnancial data providers. These approaches seem less ap-
propriate for a precise comparison of technologies within a country, as
typically the same proxies are used for solar and wind projects.
Well beyond RE assets, a general caveat of CAPM-based estimations
is the limited empirical support for the model, as demonstrated by Fama
and French (Fama and French, 1993) and others. Speciﬁc to RE projects,
transferring insights from stocks and bonds to privately held project-
ﬁnanced assets is nontrivial, and the extant literature is partly based
on strong assumptions to that end. The precision of ﬁnancial market–
based estimates hinges on the appropriateness of the market proxies
for non-market assets. Further research drawing on the asset valuation
literature is necessary to assess the appropriateness of assumptions
made in the RE cost of capital estimates thus far.
In sum, it is promising that the nascent research on the cost of capital
for RE projects has already developed a range of estimation methods
each of which has been applied in several studies. The framework pro-
vided in Fig. 3 can help future researchers choose the estimation
method depending on what type of data is best available, keeping in
mind the suitability of the different approaches as discussed, and incor-
porating all the incremental improvements that previous studies made.
Beyond reﬁning the individual methods, future research could also fur-
ther combine methods, for instance, by calibrating the premiums used
in ﬁnancial market data-based analyses more precisely based on rigor-
ously elicited data from selected deals.
6. Analysis of empirical evidence
To answer the second research question, here we analyze the har-
monized data on RE cost of capital, focusing on the after-tax WACC.
First, we discuss the consistency of the estimates as they are reported
by different studies. Second, we take into account past dynamics due
to general interest rate changes. Third, we comment on the observed
differences between countries and technologies.
6.1. Comparison of results from different estimation methods
Considering all available evidence, our literature base allowed to cal-
culate WACCafter-tax for solar PV projects in 23 different countries, for on-
shore wind projects in 28 countries, and offshore wind projects in 5
countries. Most data are for projects that were ﬁnanced from 2010/
2007 onwards (solar PV/wind) as shown in Figs. 4–6. For each technol-
ogy, estimates of WACCafter-tax per country over time are provided, with
colors indicating the different estimation methods.6 To illustrate devel-
opments over time and allow for the comparison of studies, three or
more data points for the same country are connected by lines.
The ﬁrst set of observations concern which estimation methods have
been used for different technologies: While the elicitation of project
data and surveys of expert estimates have been used universally, the
replication of auction results so far has been limited to solar PV, a tech-
nology that experienced a number of record-breaking low bids which
motivated two detailed analyses of the underlying factors. The analysis
of ﬁnancial market data, in contrast, has been used mainly for wind
power (both onshore and offshore). It is not obvious why that is the
case, and applying ﬁnancial market-based analyses to solar PV projects
seems an area for further research. In addition, all the available broader
cross-country analyses draw on either expert estimates (Angelopoulos
et al., 2016; Kumar et al., 2017; Voormolen et al., 2016; Wood and
Ross, 2012) or auction result replication (Dobrotkova et al., 2018), and
the use of ﬁnancial market data for such purposes is pending.
Given the diverse set of countries that have been analyzed, the over-
lap in terms of different studies estimating WACCs for the same country,
technology, and year is limited, such that a comparison of methods is
only partly possible. For onshore wind projects, multiple studies cover
6 Each study and year is shown as one data point (which might be based on several data
points in the respective study.
8
B. Steffen / Energy Economics 88 (2020) 104783
the cost of capital for Germany: The ﬁnancial market-based estimate by
Werner & Scholtens (Werner and Scholtens, 2017), elicited deal data by
Egli et al. (Egli et al., 2018), and expert estimates by Angelopoulos et al.
(Angelopoulos et al., 2016) and Wood & Ross (Wood and Ross, 2012)
are roughly consistent in the years in which the studies overlap (see
Fig. 5). In addition, the estimates for onshore wind in Denmark from in-
terviews (Angelopoulos et al., 2016) and ﬁnancial market data
(Partridge, 2018) are consistent. For solar PV projects, different esti-
mates for India (Dobrotkova et al., 2018; Kumar et al., 2017; Shrimali
et al., 2013) are all in the same magnitude (see Fig. 4). For offshore
wind projects, only Belgian projects have been analyzed in two studies
for the same year: The ﬁnancial market–based estimate by Estache &
Steichen (Estache and Steichen, 2015) thereby is more than 7 percent-
age point lower than the interview-based estimate by Voormolen
(Voormolen et al., 2016), and overall, is a clear outlier (see the discus-
sion of methodological shortcomings in Section 5.4.2).
6.2. Analysis of WACC markups
As shown in Figs. 4–6, the cost of capital within countries clearly
varies over time, with a general downward trend over the period ana-
lyzed. To analyze RE-speciﬁc trends net of the development of
economy-wide interest rates (see Section 3.3.), Fig. 7 provides the
WACCafter-tax markup for countries with at least three data points. Com-
pared to the total WACC values shown in Figs. 4 and 5, the development
of WACC markups over time is qualitatively the same. For example,
there is still a clear decrease in Germany and Greece for both technolo-
gies (although at a slightly lower rate), likely reﬂecting ﬁnancing
Fig. 4. Overview estimates of the WACC for solar PV projects.
Fig. 5. Overview estimates of the WACC for onshore wind projects.
9
B. Steffen / Energy Economics 88 (2020) 104783
experience effects as described by Egli et al. (Egli et al., 2018). Only be-
fore 2009 (i.e., before the economy-wide interest rate regime changed)
do the markup values look very different, approaching zero for onshore
wind projects in Germany and Denmark. These values seem to be less
comparable with the markups from later years.
6.3. RE cost of capital by country and technology
To further allow a comparison between countries, even if the esti-
mates address different years, we averaged the WACC markup for the
period 2009–2017 and provide these values in Table 2.7 For easier com-
parison, the table also provides the WACC calculated for average 2017
interest rate levels alongside the markups. As indicated in the table,
the coverage for many countries is still very limited; only for six
countries are there values from three or more studies (OECD countries
Denmark, Germany, and Greece; and non-OECD countries Brazil, India,
and United Arab Emirates). The WACC levels for these countries are
depicted in Fig. 8.
Clearly, the data points for different countries and technologies are
drawn from studies which used different methods that each have limita-
tions as discussed in Section 5. Nevertheless, the collective body of empir-
ical evidence in Table 2 and Fig. 8 exhibits several patterns in how the cost
of capital for RE projects differs between countries and technologies.
On average, the WACCs in developed countries are clearly below
those for developing countries, with a difference between the average
WACC between OECD and non-OECD countries of 2.0 percentage points
for solar PV projects and 3.1 percentage points for onshore wind pro-
jects (see Fig. 8).8 This pattern is consistent with the literature on RE
7 Excluding pre-2009 values limits the analysis to the relatively stable interest rate en-
vironment mentioned above.
8 Unweighted average of those OECD and non-OECD countries for which data are avail-
able. Offshore wind power has not yet been deployed at scale in developing countries.
Fig. 6. Overview estimates of the WACC for offshore wind projects.
Fig. 7. General interest rate level and markups over time.
10
B. Steffen / Energy Economics 88 (2020) 104783
investment in developing countries which emphasizes that high ﬁnanc-
ing costs are an important barrier to investment (Schmidt, 2014;
Shrimali et al., 2013). However, the difference between the average
rate in OECD countries and the average rate in non-OECD countries for
which data is available appears rather moderate, especially for solar
PV with just 2.0 percentage points. Importantly, these averages compare
rather heterogeneous groups of countries, as illustrated by Germany
and Greece (both OECD), or India and the United Arab Emirates (both
non-OECD)—underlining the necessity to consider the speciﬁc situation
of each country.
For solar PV, since 2015 many large projects in developing coun-
tries have been deployed through competitive auctions that yielded
a comparably low cost of capital (see the orange dots in Fig. 4), partly
enabled by ﬁnancial de-risking instruments from multilateral
development banks. But there are large differences between devel-
oping countries: Jamaica, Peru, Saudi Arabia, and Zambia have a
WACC for solar PV projects below 5%, and the WACC is above 10%
for Cambodia, India, Malaysia, Thailand, and Vietnam. The data also
show that for India (one of the largest solar PV markets) the WACC
levels and markups hardly improved between 2011 and 2016, unlike
in other countries.
For wind power projects, in contrast, no developing country has an
estimated WACC below 5%, and the difference to OECD countries is
larger, even though there are also several European Union (EU) coun-
tries with a WACC above 10% (Croatia, Greece, Hungary, Romania, and
Slovenia).
Ordering the technologies by their cost of capital, we observe a clear
pattern for all countries, with the WACC for solar PV projects the lowest,
Table 2
Average WACC markups and WACC at 2017 interest rates, per technology and country.
Solar PV
Onshore wind
Offshore wind
No. of data points considereda
WACCafter-tax
WACCafter-tax
WACCafter-tax
WACCafter-tax
WACCafter-tax
WACCafter-tax
Markup to LIBOR
at Ø 2017 LIBOR
Markup to LIBOR
at Ø 2017 LIBOR
Markup to LIBOR
at Ø 2017 LIBOR
(solar PV/wind ons./wind offs)
Austria
L + 6.1%
5.9%
(−/ 1 / -)
Belgium
L + 2.7%
2.5%
L + 3.5%
3.3%
5.7%
5.5%
(1 / 2 / 2)
Brazil
L + 4.6%
6.4%
(3 / - / -)
Bulgaria
L + 9.6%
9.4%
(−/ 1 / -)
Cambodia
L + 8.6%
10.4%
(1 / - / -)
Chile
L + 3.1%
4.9%
(2 / - / -)
China
L + 5.6%
7.4%
(1 / - / -)
Croatia
L + 11.6%
11.4%
(−/ 1 / -)
Cyprus
L + 9.6%
9.4%
(−/ 1 / -)
Czech Republic
L + 7.6%
7.4%
(−/ 1 / -)
Denmark
L + 5.2%
5.1%
L + 7.9%
7.8%
(−/ 3 / 1)
El Salvador
L + 4.3%
6.1%
(1 / - / -)
Estonia
L + 9.3%
9.1%
(−/ 1 / -)
Finland
L + 6.1%
5.9%
(−/ 1 / -)
France
L + 5.3%
5.1%
(−/ 1 / -)
Germany
L + 2.9%
2.7%
L + 3.1%
3.0%
L + 6.3%
6.1%
(4 / 11 / 2)
Greece
L + 12.0%
11.8%
L + 11.9%
11.7%
(3 / 4 / -)
Guatemala
L + 7.9%
9.7%
(1 / - / -)
Hungary
L + 10.9%
10.7%
(−/ 1 / -)
India
L + 8.8%
10.6%
L + 9.6%
11.4%
(5 / 3 / -)
Ireland
L + 8.6%
8.4%
(−/ 1 / -)
Italy
L + 7.6%
7.4%
(−/ 1 / -)
Jamaica
L + 2.5%
4.3%
(1 / - / -)
Jordan
L + 3.7%
5.5%
(1 / - / -)
Latvia
L + 8.9%
8.7%
(−/ 1 / -)
Lithuania
L + 8.1%
7.9%
(−/ 1 / -)
Malaysia
L + 8.6%
10.4%
(1 / - / -)
Mexico
L + 3.1%
4.9%
(1 / - / -)
Netherlands
L + 5.9%
5.7%
L + 9.9%
9.8%
(−/ 1 / 1)
Peru
L + 2.5%
4.3%
(2 / - / -)
Poland
L + 8.9%
8.7%
(−/ 1 / -)
Portugal
L + 7.6%
7.4%
(−/ 1 / -)
Romania
L + 10.7%
10.5%
(−/ 1 / -)
Saudi Arabia
L + 2.5%
4.2%
(1 / - / -)
Slovakia
L + 7.7%
7.5%
(−/ 1 / -)
Slovenia
L + 10.6%
10.4%
(−/ 1 / -)
South Africa
L + 4.8%
6.6%
(2 / - / -)
Spain
L + 9.6%
9.4%
(−/ 1 / -)
Sweden
L + 7.8%
7.6%
(−/ 1 / -)
Thailand
L + 10.1%
11.9%
(1 / - / -)
Uganda
L + 6.0%
7.8%
(1 / - / -)
United Arab Emirates
L + 3.7%
5.5%
(4 / - / -)
United Kingdom
L + 5.5%
6.2%
L + 11.9%
12.6%
(−/ 1 / 1)
United States
L + 4.8%
6.5%
(−/ 2 / -)
Vietnam
L + 8.6%
10.4%
(1 / - / -)
Zambia
L + 2.5%
4.2%
(1 / - / -)
Average OECDb
L + 4.8%
5.4%
L + 7.4%
7.3%
L + 8.3%
8.3%
Average non-OECDb
L + 5.6%
7.4%
L + 10.2%
10.4%
–
–
Notes: LIBOR = London Interbank Offered Rate (a common benchmark interest rate). As the EUR LIBOR was negative (−0.18%) in 2017, the WACC at Ø 2017 LIBOR rates is lower than the
markup in EUR countries.
a Each study and year is considered as one data point, which might be based on several data points in the respective study.
b Unweighted averages of values from countries for which data area available.
11
B. Steffen / Energy Economics 88 (2020) 104783
followed by the WACC for onshore wind projects, and the WACC for off-
shore wind projects the highest.9 This order reﬂects the investor per-
ception that since having become fully mature, solar PV has a lower
operational risk than wind (Egli et al., 2018), which also fueled the re-
cent rapid expansion to developing countries (Steffen et al., 2018).
Finally, the cross-country variance showed in Table 2 is larger for on-
shore or offshore wind power than for solar PV, mainly driven by results
from the broad interview-based studies by Angelopoulos et al.
(Angelopoulos et al., 2016) and Voormoolen et al. (Voormolen et al.,
2016). Such a large variance is not apparent in the other broad studies
by Wood & Ross (Wood and Ross, 2012) and Dobrotkova et al.
(Dobrotkova et al., 2018) which, however, cover different countries.
Thus, whether the different variance between technologies is due to ac-
tual technology differences or the estimation method used cannot be
ascertained from the available data.
In sum, comparing the available empirical evidence shows differ-
ences between countries and technologies that are in line with expecta-
tions from qualitative literature, as discussed in Section 2.3. For many
countries, empirical WACC estimates are now available, and can be
used by energy economists and energy system modelers. However,
the overall fragmented coverage, with many countries having been in-
vestigated in only one or two articles, clearly calls for further research
to increase the reliability of the estimates.
7. Conclusion
Aiming to address the scarcity of solid data on the cost of capital for
RE projects, this systematic literature review identiﬁed 19 articles that
estimated WACCs for solar PV, onshore wind, or offshore wind power,
yielding values for 46 countries. For these countries, we ﬁnd a consistent
rank order among technologies, with the cost of capital increasing from
solar PV to onshore wind to offshore wind power. On average, the cost
of capital in developing countries is signiﬁcantly higher than in industri-
alized countries, but major differences also occur between countries
which are comparable with respect to their state of economic
development.
The suitability and limitations of different estimation methods
has been discussed, suggesting that future research on RE cost of cap-
ital can further improve the accuracy of the estimates by taking into
account all the reﬁnements that extant literature has proposed.
Concerning the empirical scope of future studies, some major gaps
in coverage should be addressed. For instance, data for major RE
markets, such as France, Italy, and the United States, are very limited.
In addition, it would also be desirable to gather additional evidence
on countries for which estimates are already available, because
only a regional overlap of studies will allow to more profoundly as-
sess the consistency of studies (i.e. several studies need to estimate
values for the same countries to allow a comparison of results). In-
creased country and technology overlap can help improve under-
standing of the uncertainty in results for a particular method, such
as expert estimates (cf. Nemet et al., 2017), and compare the preci-
sion delivered by different methods.
For energy economists, and energy system modelers more generally,
the large heterogeneity in WACC estimates that became apparent in this
article clearly emphasizes the relevance of using different cost of capital
assumptions in many contexts. The present analysis yielded robust evi-
dence for differences between countries and technologies that can be
used, for instance, in RE investment models and energy system models
with endogenous investment.
Finally, the transparency that this review created should also be of
interest to policymakers concerned about decarbonizing power genera-
tion. The large differences in the cost of capital for RE projects between
countries highlights not only the need to consider RE cost of capital for
cost-effective deployment strategies (cf. May and Neuhoff, 2017), but
also the potential to explicitly address ﬁnancing costs as part of a renew-
able energy policy mix (Geddes et al., 2018; Kirkpatrick and Bennear,
2014; Krupa et al., 2019; Shrimali et al., 2013). In the European Union,
for instance, policymakers acknowledge that reducing ﬁnancing costs
can have a material impact on the competitiveness of RE (EU
Commission, 2018), but only transparency of cost of capital across coun-
tries and technologies will allow to design appropriate policy
interventions.
Funding
This work was supported by the Swiss State Secretariat for Educa-
tion, Research and Innovation (SERI) under contract number 16.0222.
The opinions expressed and arguments employed herein do not neces-
sarily reﬂect the ofﬁcial views of the Swiss Government. This work was
conducted as part of the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme project INNOPATHS under grant agreement
No. 730403.
Author statement
Author contribution statement not applicable because single-
authored.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The author declares no competing interests.
9 The only exception is Greece where the WACCs for solar PV and onshore wind power
are almost identical at 11.8% and 11.7%, respectively.
Fig. 8. Average WACC at 2017 interest rates.
12
B. Steffen / Energy Economics 88 (2020) 104783
Acknowledgements
The author thanks F. Egli, T. Schmidt, members of ETH Zurich's En-
ergy Politics Group, participants at the 42nd IAEE International Confer-
ence, Montréal/Canada, as well as the anonymous reviewers for helpful
comments on earlier drafts of the paper.
Appendix A. List of abbreviations
Table A.1
Abbreviations used in the article.
Abbreviation
Explanation
BNEF
Bloomberg New Energy Finance (a ﬁnancial data provider)
CDS
Credit default spread
CoD
Cost of debt
CoE
Cost of equity
DS
Debt share
EU
European Union
IEA
International Energy Agency (an international organization)
LIBOR
London Interbank Offered Rate (a benchmark interest rate)
LCOE
Levelized cost of electricity
PV
Photovoltaics
OECD
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
PPA
Power purchase agreement
RE
Renewable energy
RQ
Research question
SPV
Special purpose vehicle
WACC
Weighted average cost of capital
Appendix B. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eneco.2020.104783.
References
3E, 2013. Benchmarking Study on Offshore Wind Incentives - Comparison of the Systems
in 6 Neighbouring Countries.
Acemoglu, D., Aghion, P., Bursztyn, L., Hemous, D., 2012. The environment and directed
technical
change.
Am.
Econ.
Rev.
102,
131–166.
https://doi.org/10.1257/
aer.102.1.131.
Angelopoulos, D., Brückmann, R., Jirouš, F., Konstantinavičiūtė, I., Noothout, P., Psarras, J.,
Tesnière, L., Breitschopf, B., 2016. Risks and cost of capital for onshore wind energy
investments in EU countries. Energy Environ. 27, 82–104. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0958305X16638573.
Angelopoulos, D., Doukas, H., Psarras, J., Stamtsis, G., 2017. Risk-based analysis and policy
implications for renewable energy investments in Greece. Energy Policy 105,
512–523. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENPOL.2017.02.048.
Apostoleris, H., Sgouridis, S., Stefancich, M., Chiesa, M., 2018. Evaluating the factors that
led to low-priced solar electricity projects in the Middle East. Nat. Energy 3,
1109–1114. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-018-0256-3.
Ardani, K., Davidson, C., Truitt, S., Margolis, R., Seif, D., Morris, J., Torbert, R., 2013a. Non-
hardware cost reduction roadmap to 2020 for residential and commercial PV: prelim-
inary ﬁndings. 42nd ASES National Solar Conference 2013, SOLAR 2013, pp. 14–25.
Ardani, K., Seif, D., Davidson, C., Morris, J., Truitt, S., Torbert, R., Margolis, R., 2013b. Prelim-
inary non-hardware (“soft”) cost-reduction roadmap for residential and small com-
mercial solar photovoltaics, 2013-2020. 2013 IEEE 39th Photovoltaic Specialists
Conference
(PVSC).
IEEE,
pp.
3463–3468.
https://doi.org/10.1109/
PVSC.2013.6745192.
Arrow, K.J., Cropper, M.L., Gollier, C., Groom, B., Heal, G.M., Newell, R.G., Nordhaus, W.D.,
Pindyck, R.S., Pizer, W.A., Portney, P.R., Sterner, T., Tol, R.S.J., Weitzman, M.L., 2014.
Should governments use a declining discount rate in project analysis? Rev. Environ.
Econ. Policy 8, 145–163. https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/reu008.
Baker, E., Bosetti, V., Anadon, L.D., Henrion, M., Aleluia Reis, L., 2015. Future costs of key
low-carbon energy technologies: harmonization and aggregation of energy technol-
ogy expert elicitation data. Energy Policy 80, 219–232. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
ENPOL.2014.10.008.
Borenstein, S., 2012. The private and public economics of renewable electricity genera-
tion. J. Econ. Perspect. 26, 67–92. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.26.1.67.
Brotherson, W.T., Eades, K.M., Harris, R.S., Higgins, R.C., 2013. “Best practices” in estimat-
ing the cost of capital: an update. J. Appl. Financ. 23, 15–33.
Chassot, S., Hampl, N., Wüstenhagen, R., 2014. When energy policy meets free-market
capitalists: the moderating inﬂuence of worldviews on risk perception and renew-
able energy investment decisions. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 3, 143–151. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.erss.2014.07.013.
Cooper, H., 1998. Synthesizing Research: A Guide for Literature Reviews. 3rd editio. Sage.
Courtois, Y., Lai, G.C., Drake, P.P., 2012. Cost of capital. In: Clayman, M.R., Fridson, M.S.,
Troughton, G.H. (Eds.), Corporate Finance - a Practical Approach. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc, pp. 127–170.
Creutzig, F., Agoston, P., Goldschmidt, J.C., Luderer, G., Nemet, G., Pietzcker, R.C., 2017. The
underestimated potential of solar energy to mitigate climate change. Nat. Energy 2.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nenergy.2017.140.
Dietz, S., Gollier, C., Kessler, L., 2018. The climate beta. J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 87,
258–274. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JEEM.2017.07.005.
Dobrotkova, Z., Surana, K., Audinet, P., 2018. The price of solar energy: comparing com-
petitive auctions for utility-scale solar PV in developing countries. Energy Policy
118, 133–148. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENPOL.2018.03.036.
Donovan, C., Nuñez, L., 2012. Figuring what’s fair: the cost of equity capital for renewable
energy in emerging markets. Energy Policy 40, 49–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
ENPOL.2010.06.060.
Ecofys, 2016. The Impact of Risks in Renewable Energy Investments and the Role of Smart
Policies. EU DiaCore Final Rep.
Egli, F., 2020. Renewable energy investment risk: an investigation of changes over time
and the underlying drivers. Energy Policy 140, 111428. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enpol.2020.111428.
Egli, F., Steffen, B., Schmidt, T.S., 2018. A dynamic analysis of ﬁnancing conditions for re-
newable energy technologies. Nat. Energy 3, 1084–1092.
Egli, F., Steffen, B., Schmidt, T.S., 2019. Bias in energy system models with uniform cost of
capital assumption. Nat. Commun. 10, 1–3. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-
12468-z.
Estache, A., Steichen, A.-S., 2015. Is Belgium overshooting in its policy support to cut the
cost of capital of renewable sources of energy ? Reﬂets Perspect. la vie économique
LIV, 33 https://doi.org/10.3917/rpve.541.0033.
EU Commission, 2018. Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 11 December 2018 on the Promotion of the Use of Energy from Renewable
Sources.
Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.
J. Financ. Econ. 33, 3–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(93)90023-5.
Fell, H., Linn, J., 2013. Renewable electricity policies, heterogeneity, and cost effectiveness.
J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 66, 688–707. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JEEM.2013.03.004.
Geddes, A., Schmidt, T.S., Steffen, B., 2018. The multiple roles of state investment banks in
low-carbon energy ﬁnance: an analysis of Australia, the UK and Germany. Energy Pol-
icy 115, 158–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2018.01.009.
Goulder, L.H., Mathai, K., 2000. Optimal CO2 abatement in the presence of induced tech-
nological change. J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 39, 1–38. https://doi.org/10.1006/
JEEM.1999.1089.
Hainz, C., Kleimeier, S., 2012. Political risk, project ﬁnance, and the participation of devel-
opment banks in syndicated lending. J. Financ. Intermed. 21, 287–314. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jﬁ.2011.10.002.
Helms, T., Salm, S., Wüstenhagen, R., 2015. Investor-speciﬁc cost of capital and renewable
energy investment decisions. In: Donovan, C.W. (Ed.), Renewable Energy Finance.
Imperial College Press, London, pp. 77–101.
Henderson, M., 2016. Financing renewable energy. In: Morrison, R. (Ed.), The Principles of
Project Finance. Routledge, New York, pp. 163–182.
Hirth, L., 2013. The market value of variable renewables: the effect of solar wind power
variability on their relative price. Energy Econ. 38, 218–236. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.ENECO.2013.02.004.
Hirth, L., Steckel, J.C., 2016. The role of capital costs in decarbonizing the electricity sector.
Environ. Res. Lett. 11, 114010. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/11/11/114010.
Hunter, J.E., Schmidt, F.L., 2004. Methods of Meta-Analysis: Correcting Error and Bias in
Research Findings. 2nd editio. Sage.
Iyer, G.C., Clarke, L.E., Edmonds, J.a., Flannery, B.P., Hultman, N.E., McJeon, H.C., Victor, D.G.,
2015. Improved representation of investment decisions in assessments of CO2 miti-
gation. Nat. Clim. Chang. 5, 436–440. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2553.
Joskow, P.L., 2011. Comparing the costs of intermittent and dispatchable electricity gener-
ating technologies. Am. Econ. Rev. 101, 238–241. https://doi.org/10.1257/
aer.101.3.238.
Kim, J., Park, K., 2016. Financial development and deployment of renewable energy tech-
nologies. Energy Econ. 59, 238–250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2016.08.012.
Kirkpatrick, A.J., Bennear, L.S., 2014. Promoting clean energy investment: an empirical
analysis of property assessed clean energy. J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 68, 357–375.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JEEM.2014.05.001.
Kitzing, L., Weber, C., 2015. Support mechanisms for renewables: how risk exposure in-
ﬂuences investment incentives. Int. J. Sustain. Energy Plan. Manag. 7, 113–130.
https://doi.org/10.5278/IJSEPM.2015.7.9.
KPMG, 2018. Corporate Tax Rate Tables (WWW Document).
Krupa, J., Harvey, L.D., 2017. Renewable electricity ﬁnance in the United States: a state-of-
the-art review. Energy 135, 913–929. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2017.05.190.
Krupa, J., Poudineh, R., Harvey, L.D.D., 2019. Renewable electricity ﬁnance in the resource-
rich countries of the Middle East and North Africa: a case study on the Gulf coopera-
tion council. Energy 166, 1047–1062. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2018.10.106.
Kumar, S., Anisuzaman, M., Das, P., 2017. Estimating the low-carbon technology deploy-
ment costs and INDC targets. Globalization of Low-Carbon Technologies. Springer
Singapore, Singapore, pp. 335–366. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-4901-9_10.
Labordena, M., Patt, A., Bazilian, M., Howells, M., Lilliestam, J., 2017. Impact of political and
economic barriers for concentrating solar power in sub-Saharan Africa. Energy Policy
102, 52–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2016.12.008.
Leisen, R., Steffen, B., Weber, C., 2019. Regulatory risk and the resilience of new sustain-
able business models in the energy sector. J. Clean. Prod. 2019, 865–878.
Lilliestam, J., Pitz-Paal, R., 2018. Concentrating solar power for less than USD 0.07 per
kWh: ﬁnally the breakthrough? Renew. Energy Focus 26, 17–21. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.REF.2018.06.002.
13
B. Steffen / Energy Economics 88 (2020) 104783
Lintner, J., 1965. Security prices, risk, and maximal gains from diversiﬁcation. J. Financ. 20,
587–615. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1965.tb02930.x.
Lorenzoni, A., Bano, L., 2009. Renewable electricity costs in Italy: an estimation of the cost
of operating in an uncertain world. Int. J. Environ. Pollut. 39, 92–111.
Luderer, G., Pietzcker, R.C., Carrara, S., de Boer, H.S., Fujimori, S., Johnson, N., Mima, S.,
Arent, D., 2017. Assessment of wind and solar power in global low-carbon energy
scenarios: an introduction. Energy Econ. 64, 542–551. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
ENECO.2017.03.027.
Luderer, G., Vrontisi, Z., Bertram, C., Edelenbosch, O.Y., Pietzcker, R.C., Rogelj, J., De Boer,
H.S., Drouet, L., Emmerling, J., Fricko, O., Fujimori, S., Havlík, P., Iyer, G., Keramidas,
K., Kitous, A., Pehl, M., Krey, V., Riahi, K., Saveyn, B., Tavoni, M., Van Vuuren, D.P.,
Kriegler, E., 2018. Residual fossil CO2 emissions in 1.5–2°C pathways. Nat. Clim.
Chang. 8, 626–633. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0198-6.
Lüthi, S., Wüstenhagen, R., 2012. The price of policy risk — empirical insights from choice
experiments with European photovoltaic project developers. Energy Econ. 34,
1001–1011. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENECO.2011.08.007.
May, N., 2017. The impact of wind power support schemes on technology choices. Energy
Econ. 65, 343–354. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2017.05.017.
May, N.G., Neuhoff, K., 2017. Financing Power: Impacts of Energy Policies in Changing
Regulatory Environments. DIW Berlin Discuss. Pap. No. 1684.
https://doi.org/
10.2139/ssrn.3046516.
Mazzucato, M., Semieniuk, G., 2018. Financing renewable energy: who is ﬁnancing what
and why it matters. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 127, 8–22. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.techfore.2017.05.021.
Nemet, G.F., Anadon, L.D., Verdolini, E., 2017. Quantifying the effects of expert selection
and elicitation design on experts’ conﬁdence in their judgments about future energy
technologies. Risk Anal. 37, 315–330. https://doi.org/10.1111/risa.12604.
Neuhoff, K., May, N., Richstein, J.C., 2018. Renewable Energy Policy in the Age of Falling
Technology Costs.
Ondraczek, J., Komendantova, N., Patt, A., 2015. WACC the dog: the effect of ﬁnancing
costs on the levelized cost of solar PV power. Renew. Energy 75, 888–898. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2014.10.053.
Partridge, I., 2018. Cost comparisons for wind and thermal power generation. Energy Pol-
icy 112, 272–279. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENPOL.2017.10.006.
Petticrew, M., Roberts, H., 2006. Systematic Reviews in the Social Sciences. Blackwell Pub-
lishing, Melden, MA.
Pietzcker, R.C., Ueckerdt, F., Carrara, S., de Boer, H.S., Després, J., Fujimori, S., Johnson, N.,
Kitous, A., Scholz, Y., Sullivan, P., Luderer, G., 2017. System integration of wind and
solar power in integrated assessment models: a cross-model evaluation of new ap-
proaches. Energy Econ. 64, 583–599. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENECO.2016.11.018.
Polzin, F., Egli, F., Steffen, B., Schmidt, T.S., 2019. How do policies mobilize private ﬁnance
for renewable energy?—a systematic review with an investor perspective. Appl. En-
ergy 236, 1249–1268. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APENERGY.2018.11.098.
Pratt, S.P., Grabowski, R.J., 2014. Cost of Capital: Applications and Examples. Fifth edition.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118846780.
Salm, S., 2018. The investor-speciﬁc price of renewable energy project risk – a choice ex-
periment with incumbent utilities and institutional investors. Renew. Sust. Energ.
Rev. 82, 1364–1375. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RSER.2017.04.009.
Salm, S., Wüstenhagen, R., 2018. Dream team or strange bedfellows? Complementarities
and differences between incumbent energy companies and institutional investors in
Swiss
hydropower.
Energy
Policy
121,
476–487.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
ENPOL.2018.04.046.
Schmidt, T.S., 2014. Low-carbon investment risks and de-risking. Nat. Clim. Chang. 4,
237–239. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2112.
Scholz, Y., Gils, H.C., Pietzcker, R.C., 2017. Application of a high-detail energy system
model to derive power sector characteristics at high wind and solar shares. Energy
Econ. 64, 568–582. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENECO.2016.06.021.
Sharpe, W., 1964. Capital asset prices: a theory of market equilibrium under conditions of
risk. J. Financ. 19, 425–442. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1964.tb02865.x.
Shrimali, G., Nelson, D., Goel, S., Konda, C., Kumar, R., 2013. Renewable deployment in
India: ﬁnancing costs and implications for policy. Energy Policy 62, 28–43. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2013.07.071.
Steffen, B., 2018. The importance of project ﬁnance for renewable energy projects. Energy
Econ. 69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2017.11.006.
Steffen, B., Papakonstantinou, V., 2015. Mitigation of political & regulatory risk in infra-
structure projects. World Economic Forum, Genevahttp://www3.weforum.org/docs/
WEF_Risk_Mitigation_Report_2015.pdf.
Steffen, B., Matsuo, T., Steinemann, D., Schmidt, T.S., 2018. Opening new markets for clean
energy: the role of project developers in the global diffusion of renewable energy
technologies. Bus. Polit. 20, 553–587. https://doi.org/10.1017/bap.2018.17.
Steffen, B., Beuse, M., Tautorat, P., Schmidt, T.S., 2020. Experience curves for operations
and maintenance costs of renewable energy technologies. Joule 4, 1–17. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.joule.2019.11.012.
Stocks, K.J., 1984. Discount rate for technology assessment: an application to the energy
sector. Energy Econ. 6, 177–185. https://doi.org/10.1016/0140-9883(84)90014-8.
Sweerts, B., Longa, F.D., van der Zwaan, B., 2019. Financial de-risking to unlock Africa’s re-
newable energy potential. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 102, 75–82. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.RSER.2018.11.039.
Szabó, S., Jäger-Waldau, A., Szabó, L., 2010. Risk adjusted ﬁnancial costs of photovoltaics.
Energy Policy 38, 3807–3819. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2010.03.001.
Tietjen, O., Pahle, M., Fuss, S., 2016. Investment risks in power generation: a comparison
of fossil fuel and renewable energy dominated markets. Energy Econ. 58, 174–185.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2016.07.005.
Vogt-Schilb, A., Meunier, G., Hallegatte, S., 2018. When starting with the most expensive
option makes sense: optimal timing, cost and sectoral allocation of abatement invest-
ment.
J.
Environ.
Econ.
Manag.
88,
210–233.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
JEEM.2017.12.001.
Voormolen, J.A., Junginger, H.M., van Sark, W.G.J.H.M., 2016. Unravelling historical cost
developments of offshore wind energy in Europe. Energy Policy 88, 435–444.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENPOL.2015.10.047.
Waissbein, O., Glemarec, Y., Bayraktar, H., Schmidt, T., 2013. Derisking Renewable Energy
Investment. A Framework to Support Policymakers in Selecting Public Instruments to
Promote Renewable Energy Investment in Developing Countries. United Nations De-
velopment Programme, New York.
Waissbein, O., Bayraktar, H., Henrich, C., Schmidt, T.S., Malhotra, A., 2018. Derisking Re-
newable Energy Investment: Off-Grid Electriﬁcation. United Nations Development
Programme, New York.
Weaver, T., 2012. Financial appraisal of operational offshore wind energy projects. Renew.
Sust. Energ. Rev. 16, 5110–5120. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RSER.2012.05.003.
Weitzman, M.L., 2007. A review of the stern review on the economics of climate change.
J. Econ. Lit. 45, 703–724. https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.45.3.703.
Werner, L., Scholtens, B., 2017. Firm type, feed-in tariff, and wind energy investment in
Germany: an investigation of decision making factors of energy producers regarding
investing in wind energy capacity. J. Ind. Ecol. 21, 402–411. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jiec.12443.
Wood, T., Ross, N., 2012. The Financial Cost of Wind Energy: A Multi-National Case Study.
Nova Science Pub Inc.
Zhang, M.M., Zhou, P., Zhou, D.Q., 2016. A real options model for renewable energy invest-
ment with application to solar photovoltaic power generation in China. Energy Econ.
59, 213–226. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENECO.2016.07.028.
14
B. Steffen / Energy Economics 88 (2020) 104783
