.
.
Latest updates: hps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3580305.3599238
.
.
RESEARCH-ARTICLE
3D-IDS: Doubly Disentangled Dynamic Intrusion Detection
CHENYANG QIU, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, Beijing, China
.
YINGSHENG GENG, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, Beijing,
China
.
JUNRUI LU, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, Beijing, China
.
KAIDA CHEN, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, Beijing, China
.
SHITONG ZHU, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, Beijing, China
.
YA SU, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
.
View all
.
.
Open Access Support provided by:
.
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
.
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
.
PDF Download
3580305.3599238.pdf
02 February 2026
Total Citations: 16
Total Downloads: 778
.
.Published: 06 August 2023
.
.
Citation in BibTeX format
.
.
KDD '23: The 29th ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining
August 6 - 10, 2023
CA, Long Beach, USA
.
.
Conference Sponsors:
SIGMOD
SIGKDD
KDD '23: Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (August 2023)
hps://doi.org/10.1145/3580305.3599238
ISBN: 9798400701030
.

3D-IDS: Doubly Disentangled Dynamic Intrusion Detection
Chenyang Qiu
Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
cyqiu@bupt.edu.cnYingsheng Geng
Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
gyswasdfre2255@bupt.edu.cnJunrui Lu
Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
672@bupt.edu.cn
Kaida Chen
Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
chenkaida@bupt.edu.cnShitong Zhu
Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
1337612789@bupt.edu.cnYa Su
HUAWEI Technologies Co., Ltd.
suya9@huawei.com
Guoshun Nan∗
Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
nanguo2021@bupt.edu.cnCan Zhang
Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
zhangcan_bupt@bupt.edu.cnJunsong Fu
Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
fujs@bupt.edu.cn
Qimei Cui
Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
cuiqimei@bupt.edu.cnXiaofeng Tao
Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
taoxf@bupt.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Network-based intrusion detection system (NIDS) monitors net-
work traffic for malicious activities, forming the frontline defense
against increasing attacks over information infrastructures. Al-
though promising, our quantitative analysis shows that existing
methods perform inconsistently in declaring various unknown at-
tacks (e.g., 9%and35%F1 respectively for two distinct unknown
threats for an SVM-based method) or detecting diverse known at-
tacks (e.g., 31% F1 for the Backdoor and 93% F1 for DDoS by a
GCN-based state-of-the-art method), and reveals that the underly-
ing cause is entangled distributions of flow features. This motivates
us to propose 3D-IDS, a novel method that aims to tackle the above
issues through two-step feature disentanglements and a dynamic
graph diffusion scheme. Specifically, we first disentangle traffic
features by a non-parameterized optimization based on mutual
information, automatically differentiating tens and hundreds of
complex features of various attacks. Such differentiated features
will be fed into a memory model to generate representations, which
are further disentangled to highlight the attack-specific features.
Finally, we use a novel graph diffusion method that dynamically
fuses the network topology for spatial-temporal aggregation in
evolving data streams. By doing so, we can effectively identify vari-
ous attacks in encrypted traffics, including unknown threats and
∗Guoshun Nan is the corresponding author.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’23, August 6–10, 2023, Long Beach, CA, USA.
©2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0103-0/23/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3580305.3599238known ones that are not easily detected. Experiments show the
superiority of our 3D-IDS. We also demonstrate that our two-step
feature disentanglements benefit the explainability of NIDS.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Security and privacy →Mobile and wireless security .
KEYWORDS
Intrusion Detection; Anomaly Detection; Network Security
ACM Reference Format:
Chenyang Qiu, Yingsheng Geng, Junrui Lu, Kaida Chen, Shitong Zhu, Ya Su,
Guoshun Nan, Can Zhang, Junsong Fu, Qimei Cui, and Xiaofeng Tao. 2023.
3D-IDS: Doubly Disentangled Dynamic Intrusion Detection. In Proceedings
of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining (KDD ’23), August 6–10, 2023, Long Beach, CA, USA. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3580305.3599238
1 INTRODUCTION
Network attacks [ 6], such as password cracking [ 35], man-in-the-
middle attacks (MITM) [ 9], and denial of service (Dos) [ 58], refer to
unauthorized attempts on various digital assets in an organization’s
networks, to steal data or perform malicious actions. Network at-
tacks can also be broadly regarded as network anomalies [ 41], as
they may involve different characteristics from most other traffics.
It was reported that 31%of companies worldwide are now being
attacked at least one time a day [ 76], due to the growing trends of
mobile online business. This urgently calls for an intelligent system
that can help administrators automatically filter out these network
anomalies in a huge amount of online traffics. A network-based
intrusion detection system (NIDS) [ 38], which monitors network
traffic and identifies malicious activities, facilitates administrators
to form the frontline defense against increasing attacks over infor-
mation infrastructures (e.g., sensors and servers). Hence, NIDS is
1965
KDD ’23, August 6–10, 2023, Long Beach, CA, USA. Chenyang Qiu et al.
Figure 1: Illustration of two network attacks DoS and MITM.
DoS floods the target with massive traffic to overwhelm an
online service, and MITM eavesdrops on the communication
between two targets and steals private information. An NIDS
can be easily deployed in a single location to collect statistical
features and alert the administrator for potential threats.
widely applied in many information systems of governments and
e-commercial business sectors [ 79]. Figure 1 illustrates that two
network attacks threaten information systems, and a NIDS builds a
frontline defense against these threats.
Existing NIDS can be categorized into two types, i.e., signature-
based ones [ 19,32,49] and anomaly-based ones [ 2,20,62,73]. The
former detects network attacks based on pre-defined patterns or
known malicious sequences stored in a database, such as the num-
ber of bytes in traffic. These patterns in the NIDS are referred to
as signatures. The latter anomaly-based NIDS learns to track at-
tacks with machine learning techniques. Early statistical [ 9,58]
approaches, such as Support Vector Machine (SVM), Logistic Re-
gression (LR), and Decision Tree (DT), rely on carefully designed
handcrafted features to learn classification boundaries. Recent deep
learning-based methods [ 1,5] use millions of neural parameters
to mine the knowledge underlying the training samples, and have
achieved great success in automatically modeling complex cor-
relations for tens and thousands of features. The state-of-the-art
E-GraphSAGE [ 46] employs graph convolution networks (GCNs)
to learn the feature representations for better prediction.
Although promising, we observe that existing anomaly-based
approaches yield inconsistent results in identifying distinct attacks.
For statistical methods, Figure 2 (a) demonstrates that the detection
performance of an SVM-based method [ 31] for an unknown attack
can be as low as 9%in terms of F1 on CTC-ToN-IOT [ 52], a popular
benchmark for NIDS. While the model achieves 40%F1 in declaring
another unknown threat (DDoS) on the same benchmark. Regarding
the deep learning-based methods, Figure 2 (d) demonstrates that E-
GraphSAGE achieves a lower than 20% F1 score for MITM attacks,
and a higher than 90% F1 score for DDoS on the CTC-ToN-IOT
dataset.
To investigate the underlying cause of why existing methods
perform inconsistently for various attacks, including unknown ones
and known ones, we depict feature distributions and visualize the
representations. Figure 2 (b) and (c) depict statistical distributions of
the two unknown attacks for the SVM-based model during testing.
We observe that feature distributions of MITM attacks are entan-
gled, while the ones of DDoS are more separated. It can be inferred
that statistical distributions of traffic features are one of the main
underlying causes of performance variations. Separated distribu-
tions benefit the unknown attack identification, while entangled
ones are indistinguishable and unable to help the NIDS to makeaccurate decisions. We refer to such a phenomenon as the entan-
gled distribution of statistical features. To analyze the reason
for performance variations of acknowledged attacks during testing,
we use Pearson correlation heat map [ 14] to visualize the represen-
tations of MITM and DDoS respectively, where the representations
are generated by the encoder of E-GraphSAGE. Figure 2 (e) and
Figure 2 (f) demonstrate the two correlation maps. Interestingly,
we observe that the coefficients of MITM representations are much
larger than those of DDoS. We further compare MITM with other at-
tacks, including Backdoor and Dos, and find those high coefficients
in the representation will lead to lower intrusion detection scores.
We refer to such a phenomenon as the entangled distribution of
representational features, which can be considered as another
main cause for the degradation of attack classification.
In light of the above discussion, a critical question arises: "How
can an intrusion detection model automatically address the above
issue, i.e., two entangled distributions, to benefit the detection of both
unknown and known attacks ". Achieving this goal is challenging.
To mitigate the issue of the first entangled distribution, we need
to differentiate tens and thousands of features involved in real-
time network traffic, without prior knowledge of the statistical
distributions. Such a problem is largely under-explored in the field
of NIDS. For the second entangled distribution, there are some
remotely related methods [ 7,26,45,69] in other fields, including
computer vision and natural language processing. However, these
approaches mainly focus on object-level representation learning,
and hence they are hardly directly applied to intrusion detection to
tackle this challenging problem.
We answer the above question and address the two challenging
problems with a novel method called 3D-IDS (Doubly Disentangle
Dynamic IDS). Specifically, we first disentangle the statistical flow
features with a non-parametric optimization based on mutual in-
formation, so that entangled distributions can be automatically
separated for modeling the general features of various attacks. We
refer to this step as statistical disentanglement. Then we further
learn to differentiate the representations by a loss function, aiming
to highlight the salient features for specific attacks with smaller co-
efficients. We refer to this step as representational disentanglement.
We finally introduce a novel graph diffusion method that fuses the
graph topology for spatial-temporal aggregation in evolving traffic.
Extensive